<!-- image -->

Production of Courseware

~Content for Post Graduate Courses

<!-- image -->

An MHRD Projoct under its National Mission on Education throught ICT (NME-ICT)

<!-- image -->

Paper 06: Hotel Housekeeping

Module 01: Introduction to Housekeeping Department

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## THE DEVELOPMENT TEAM

| Principal Investigator  Prof. S. P. Bansal,                                                                                               |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Co-Principal Investigator  Dr. Prashant K. Gautam,                                                                                        |
| Paper Coordinator  Dr. Sandeep Walia,                                                                                                     |
| Content Writer  Prof. Ashish Dahiya  Director, IHTM, Maharshi Dayananad University, Rohtak,  Haryana                                      |
| Content Reviewer  Prof. S.C. Bagri  Director, Centre for Mountain Tourism & Hospitality Studies       HNB Garhwal University, Uttarakhand |

TABLE OF CONTENTS

| ITEMS           | DESCRIPTION OF MODULE                                                                                                   |
|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Subject Name    | Tourism & Hospitality                                                                                                   |
| Paper Name      | Hotel Housekeeping                                                                                                      |
| Module Title    | Introduction to Housekeeping Department                                                                                 |
| Module Id       | Module no-1                                                                                                             |
| Pre- Requisites | Basic knowledge about Housekeeping department                                                                           |
| Keywords        | departments, Housekeeping in other institutions.  Housekeeping,  Responsibilities,  Housekeeping  Functions,  cleaning. |

- 1. Learning Outcome
- 2. Introduction
- 3. Definition  & Key Essence Of Housekeeping
- 4. Objectives Of Housekeeping
- 5. Duties And Responsibilities Of Housekeeping  Department
- 6. Areas Of Responsibility
- 7. Functions Of Housekeeping Department
- 8. Coordination  &  Cooperation  Of  Housekeeping  Department  With  Other Departments
- 9. Housekeeping In Other Institutes
- 10. Summary

## QUADRANT-I

## INTRODUCTION TO HOUSEKEEPING DEPARTMENT

## (1) LEARNING OUTCOME

After completing this module students will be able to:

- a) Understand the concept of housekeeping.
- b) Know the Objectives and responsibilities of the Housekeeping department.
- c) Know the functions of Housekeeping staff.
- d) Understand  the  coordination  and  cooperation  of  Housekeeping  department  with  other departments.

## (2) INTRODUCTION

Whenever we go to any house, office, shop, restaurant, hotel, the very first thing we easily spot is the cleaning and maintenance of the  property and it infect tells a lot about the background of the property, so we must maintain everything in the house in a good and presentable order to make it look like a inviting  one.  From  here  the  concept  of  housekeeping  starts.  We  can  define  housekeeping  as maintaining home\hotel on a daily or long term basis or looking after its cleanliness, tidiness, upkeep and smooth running. The housekeeping department must ensure that each and everything in the hotel is in useable condition and properly functioning. Providing a clean, safe, comfortable environment are the key element to any good housekeeping services. One feels comfortable in such an environment which is clean, well ordered and every hotel focuses in making the ambiance as pleasant as possible by nice color scheme, well decoration, attractive furnishing and a well kept efficient staff. As a guest spend more time alone in his room than any other area of the hotel, it become important to take care of guest need from the point he checks in till he checks  out by  giving him personalized services along with proper hygiene and cleanliness. All this adds to the responsibility of the housekeeping staff. They have a lot work from cleaning and maintaining guest rooms, public areas, taking care of the laundry, linen, and bed making decoration, safety and security. Housekeeping staff have to coordinate with the other departments to provide high   quality, timely services and minimize any disturbance. All this results in a satisfied customer and make him a frequent visitor and bring profit to the hotel.

<!-- image -->

courses

## (3) DEFINITION OF HOUSEKEEPING

Housekeeping is  defined  as  the  clean  provision  of  a  clean,  comfortable  and  safe  environment.  It  is management  of  the  property  and  equipment  of  an  institute  or  organization,  a  house,  industrial  or commercial institute.

Key essence of housekeeping:

## Cleanliness

Room, toilets, bed should be clean.

Furniture and everything in the room should be maintained in its original state and proper place.

## Comfort

G"

Bed, furniture, should be such that the guest feels relaxed and comfortable.

Supplies that are kept in the room should be convenient for the guest.

## Safety and Security

The hotel must be secure from any theft, fire, short circuit, accidents.

Fire alarm, fire escape system, and smoke detectors must be there.

There should be a safety measures on all the floors.

All Post

## (4) OBJECTIVES/AIMS OF HOUSEKEEPING DEPARTMENT

-  Maintaining  clean,  safe,  comfortable,  fresh,  and  attractive  and  inviting  surrounding  for  the guest.
-  Keeping a room ready for the new arrival and contributing in the hotel's margin of profit by selling of rooms.
-  Achieving the maximum possible efficiency in making sure the care and comfort of the guest and providing maximum satisfaction by taking care of his needs.

<!-- image -->

-  Making sure of high standard of cleanliness and general upkeep of all areas the guest rooms, public areas, front of the house, back of the house etc. the department is responsible for. es
-  Providing linen in rooms, restaurant, conference hall, food and beverage department, banquet halls where ever required in the premises of the hotel.
-  Coordinating renovation and refurnishing of the hotel property,  maintain  the  landscaped  areas  of  the  hotel areas  as  and  when  ,  in  consultation  with  the management and with interior designers,
-  Providing uniforms to the hotel staff and maintaining inventory for linen and uniforms.
-  Catering  to  the  laundry  requirements  of  hotel  linen, staff uniforms and guest clothing.

403895305

<!-- image -->

-  Taking care of the lost and found articles.
-  Establishing  a  good  working  relationship  with  all  other  departments  of  the  hotel  for  better functioning of the hotel.
-  Informing the upper management of all the matters which require their attention.
-  Coordinating with the purchase department for the procurement of the guest supplies, cleaning agents, equipment, fabrics, carpet and other items used in hotel.
-  Ensuring proper training, control and supervision of all the housekeeping staff 'members.
-  Ensuring courteous, timely and reliable services from the staff.
-  Handling the issues related to the safety and security of the guest, staff's members, and hotel property.
-  Contributing in saving cost of labour, cleaning materials, equipments etc.

<!-- image -->

## (5) RESPONSIBILITIES OF HOUSEKEEPING DEPARTMENT

- 1) Guest  Satisfaction: To  providing  the  guest  with  clean,  safe,  comfortable,  attracting  and inviting surrounding for the money he/she has paid and make his stay pleasant  and  taking care of his needs from guest checks  in till he checks out by giving him personalized  and timely services.
- 2) Employees Satisfaction: To provide each employee a pleasant environment where he can fully utilize  his  skills  and  prove  to  be  more  productive  and  enhancing  the  satisfaction  level  of the staff member's.
- 3) Cleanliness : It is the services and the cleaning that influence guest to make his choice weather he will return to the property of hotel or not. High standard of cleaning and maintenance of all the guest rooms, public areas, front of the house areas and back of the house areas are taken care by Housekeeping Department.
- 4) Maintenance: To Check all the fixtures like tap, sink, geyser, wiring, electrical switches etc. are well functioning. To resist in the maintenance of the building while contributing to a safe and healthy environment. Safety and Security: To safeguard human and physical assets from any  kind  of  accidents.  The  housekeeping  staff  must  be  known  to  the  safety  and  security regulations to eliminate any kind of loss of lives or property and to provide first aid.
- 5) Providing Linen :  To provide linen where ever required if it is room, banquet hall, food and beverage  department,  restaurant,  conference  venue  and  maintain  inventories  for  linen  and uniforms.
- 6) Providing  Uniforms: To provide  uniform  and  guest  cloths  at  time  and  cater  to  the  laundry requirement.

- 7) Coordination  and  Cooperation  with  other  Departments: To  coordinate  and  ensure maximum co-operation with other departments like Front Office, Food & Beverage,  Safety and Security, Purchase and Receiving, Accounts, Laundry Services, Engineering and Maintenances to provide high quality of services and to establish a good working relationship.
- 8) Interior Decoration and Designing : To coordinate with the property as and when required in consultation with the management and the interior designer as well as to provide and maintain the floral decorations and landscaped areas of the hotel.

## 9) Other Responsibilities:

- 10) To ensure with the smooth running of the department it deals with the lost and found articles.
- 11) To  keep  the  General  Manager  and  administrator  informed  of  all  matters  requiring  special attention.
- 12) To ensure training control and supervision of all staff attached to the department.

## (6) AREAS OF RESPONSIBILITY

Every  part  in  the  hotel  needs  to  be  kept  clean,  tidy  and  everything  placed  here  should  be  in  a presentable and working condition there are the few areas which require housekeeping:

-  Rooms and Corridors : Bed, be making, carpets, door, windows,  wall paint, wall paper, fancs air conditioners, wiring, electrical switches.
-  Toilets : Water closet, tap, sink, geyser, supply of towels, toilet paper, soap, shampoo etc.
-  Furniture and Furnishing: Furniture,, sofa, dining table, chairs, table lamp, tube lights etc,
-  Garden: Plant, trees, flowers, bushes, pots lawn etc.
-  Linen: Curtains, bed sheets, cushion cover pillow covers, table covers, napkins etc.
-  Public  Areas: Stair  case,  corridors,  conference  and  seminar  room,  recreation  room,  clubs, swimming pool, parking area, offices etc.
-  Front of the House Areas: swimming pool, parking area, club, food services.
-  Back of the House Areas: Staff canteen, locker rooms, laundry, linen room,

-  Extra Room Complimentary and Supply: First aid, hot water begs, iron, ice begs, hair dryer etc.
-  Other Areas: Guest rooms, floors, uniform rooms, florist etc.:

## (7) FUNCTIONS OF HOUSEKEEPING DEPARTMENT

## 1) Cleaning Rooms and Public Area

Guestrooms  play  an  important  role  in  earning  revenues  as  well  as  in  image  building  of  the hotel. Guest always looks for comfort and expects a certain standard of services and it is the job of the Housekeeping department to make his stay comfortable and make the ambiance pleasant. Floors, lobby, dining rooms, uniform room, function room ,store room, bars, office, swimming pool each and everything required to be well cleaned by the staff.

## 2) Bed Making

A guest requires a comfortable bed to take rest, relax, sleep, enjoy and a skilled personnel will make a wrinkle free bed within minutes. Clean sheets, blankets, pillows, bottom sheet, night sheet, second sheet, foot fold everything is considered by the staff.

<!-- image -->

## 3) Clothing and Linen Management

Linen  includes  all  fabrics  that  are  used  in  a  hospitality  industry.  Basically  linen  room  is centralized  and  acts  as  a  storage  point  and  distribution  center  for  clean  linen.  Curtains,  bed sheets, cushion cover pillow covers; table covers, napkins are the example of clothes and linen used in different hotels. Linen is the one of the largest expenses of housekeeping department. Efficient linen and laundry management ensures that large volumes of soiled linen are washed

and treated so as to look neat, smell fresh and feel crisp and they are disbursed at the right time and to the right place.

## 4) Laundry Services

Another  major  function  of  housekeeping  department  is  doing  proper  cleaning  and  hygienic washing of all the linen items and ensuring a continuous supply of linen to the different areas of the hotel. A hotel may operate its laundry services through -

An in-house laundry is a laundry operating in the premises of the hotel

A commercial laundry the  hotel  does  not  manage  these  laundries  on  its  own  but  sends  the soiled linen to an outside establishment.

<!-- image -->

9

<!-- image -->

Ensuring the proper management of the keys is the prime responsibility of the housekeeping staff. It should be handled effectively and safely before and after letting the room.

## 6) Pest Control

Insects and the other small animal's like bedbugs, rat, mice, cockroaches that are harmful and or cause damage; therefore, pest control is one of the primary tasks of the department.

## 7) Safety and Security

It is the prime duty of the Housekeeping department to take care of the safety and protection of guests, employees, the property, assets of hotel. The current trend today uses the term safety in discussing matters such as disasters, fire preventions, fire protection devices and conditions that provide  for  freedom  from  injury  and  damage  to  property.  There  are  the  new  terms,  such  as

protection  and  safeguarding  of  assets, threat  analysis,  security  surveys,  and  risk analysis and risk management. Working in housekeeping  involves  physical  activities and  use  of  equipment  both  of  which increase the risk of accident and injury so, the housekeeping staff must be trained in protecting himself and others.

<!-- image -->

## 8) Interior Decoration

Along  with  the  cleaning  and  maintenance,  the  interior  decoration  is  another  key  area  the housekeeping  staffs  need  to  take  care  of.  The  aim  of  interior  decorations  is  to  aesthetically design and plan a room. It is an art of creating a pleasant atmosphere in the living room with the addition of a complex of furnishing, art and craft, appropriately combined to achieve planned results. "hm

## 9) Room Maintenance

Good housekeeping department is just as responsible for the hotel's maintenance as an engineering     department. The housekeeping staff works in close liaison with the engineering department. The damaged and broken items are regularly fixed which ultimately results in proper functioning and eliminate guest complaints.

## 10) Refurbishment and Redecoration

Gar

The  staff  has  to  do  complete  renovation  where  all  the  soft  furnishings  are  changed  and  the furniture too may be changed or redone. It is usually done once in a 3-5 years floor wise while redecoration is done as per requirements.

## 11) Budgeting

The executive housekeeper draws up the budget keeping in consideration various factors and presents the annual budget for the forthcoming Budgeting Financial year.

## (8) COORDINATION AND COOPERATION OF HOUSEKEEPING DEPARTMENT WITH OTHER DEPARTMENTS

Coordination and cooperation of Housekeeping Department with Other Departments is one of the main functions it perform in order to provide the best services to guest and making the environment a inviting one. Not only the guest satisfaction but also ensures that no department functions in insulation, leading to more effective functioning of the hotel. Each department relay on others for information and other services. The Housekeeping Department cooperates with the following departments of the hotel industry:

Front Office, Food & Beverage, Engineering & Maintenance, Purchase & Receiving, Human Resource and Personnel, Laundry etc.

## Housekeeping Department and Front Office Department

duate

- i. First of all the front office department inform the housekeeping staff about the vacant room after the guest check out for the cleaning and preparing the room for resale.
- ii. Later the cleaned rooms are handed over to the Front office by Housekeeping Department.
- iii. Major renovations are coordinated with the front office.
- iv. Front office informs housekeeping department about any VIP guest arrivals.
- v. Special requests of the guests are referred to the housekeeping staff in order to avoid complaints and to cater the guest needs.
- vi. Front office department is informed regarding any items that have been lost or found, so that the property can be returned to the guest.

## Housekeeping Department and Engineering and Maintenance Department

- i. The  maintenance  department  takes  care  of  all  repairs  such  as  electrical,  air  conditioning, plumbing,  carpentry,  painting,  polishing,  masonry,  fixtures.  After  the  repairs  the  room  is cleared to housekeeping for sale.
- ii. Advice of maintenance department is taken before purchasing any equipment.

- iii. Both the departments work in close coordination during major renovations and refurbishment projects.

## Housekeeping Department and Food and Beverage Department

- i. Food and Beverage Department coordinate with Housekeeping Department for linen, uniform, regular  cleaning  of  restaurant,  banquet  functioning,  pest  control,  and  safekeeping  of  the complimentary items.
- ii. Room service trays are cleared by housekeeping.

## Housekeeping Department and Purchase and Receiving Department

sh

- i. The  purchase  department  procures  items for  housekeeping  such  as  guest  supplies kept in rooms, stationary, linen of various types, detergents, etc.

Housekeeping Department and Human Resource and Personnel Department

<!-- image -->

- i. The both department coordinate with each other for recruitment of housekeeping staff, salary administration,  and  grievance  procedure,  identity  cards  for  staff,  induction,  transfers,  and promotions abs exit formalities.

## Housekeeping Department and Sales and marketing

- a) The Sales and marketing department inform the housekeeping of the occupancy forecast for the entire  year,  which  is  broken  up  month  wise  which  helps  housekeeping  into  budget  for  the necessary expenses.
- b) Sales and marketing department bring the guest to the hotel and the housekeeping department ensures that the repeat business is obtained by providing the level of cleanliness and services that meets or exceeds the guest expectations.
- c) Sales and marketing staff have to depend on housekeeping for their uniforms.

## Housekeeping Department and Laundry

- a) Housekeeping needs to coordinate with the laundry with regard to housekeeping employees' uniforms and those of other departments as well. Co
- b) Laundry helps in enhancing the quality of the housekeeping services.
- c) It has to supply the clean uniforms and linen to housekeeping on time.
- d) Housekeeping has to ensure that clean linen is issued to guest rooms, restaurant, health clubs

.

etc

Pos '

## (9) HOUSEKEEPING IN OTHER INSTITUTES

to

While hotels  operate  on  a  commercial  basis,  other  institutions  such  as  hostels,  hospitals  and residential  houses  are  establishments  that  satisfy  social  needs.  In  such  welfare  sectors,  a reasonable  standard  of  cleanliness  and  comfort  is  expected  at  the  lowest  cost,  dealing  with patients in hospitals or with students in hostels is a very different from dealing with the guest in hotels. Housekeeping is carried out in various types of institutions, the important ones among them being hospitals, hostels, residential houses, offices, and art galleries museums, libraries, and archives.

## Hospitals

In Hospitals, hygiene and cleanliness are the particular importance in reducing the treat of cross infection,  with  the  result  that  housekeeping  here  is  highly  organized.  It  extends  to  wards, laboratories,  administrative  areas,  doctors  chambers,  treatment  rooms,  waiting  areas,  dining areas,  and  high  -risk  areas-operation  theatres,  intensive  care  units,  transplant  units,  isolation wards etc.

The responsibilities of a hospital housekeeping team may include:

- i. Maintaining a high degree of cleanliness and hygiene with a focus on health.
- ii. Ensure safety and security.
- iii. Pest control.
- iv. Control over contracted cleaning agencies.
- v. Providing staff uniforms.
- vi. Laundering hospital linen, uniforms, and surgical suits.
- vii. Cleaning and Bed making.
- viii. Delivering and collecting patient's mils.
- ix. Catering for cloths and personal belongings.

## Hostels

V

Hostels  for  young  people  and  university  halls  of  residence  are  medium  to  long  stay establishments.  Warden  usually  takes  overall  responsibility  and  day  to  day  running  of  the establishment is delegated to managers with specialized knowledge in individual areas such as catering and housekeeping. The cleaning staff maintains the public areas like game rooms, TV lounges,  the  student  mess  etc.They  deal  with  linen,  and  vacuuming  or  buffing  of  corridors. Periodic heavy cleaning, repairs, and maintenance are carried out during vacation period.

The responsibilities of the housekeeper in a hostel will be

- i. Maintaining cleanliness and hygiene.
- ii. Reporting and checking on maintenance work.
- iii. Managing staffing.

Courses

- iv. Managing catering.
- v. Undertaking budget control.
- vi. Ensuring well being and discipline of students.
- vii. Managing room keys and handling student's mails and lost property.
- viii. Providing security.

## Universities

- i. The university's housekeeping staff may consist of the following roles:
- ii. The estate manager looks after the building maintenance and repairs.
- iii. The catering manager is in charge of food and beverages outlet, including their cleaning.
- iv. The service manager takes care of all public areas lecture rooms, and other teaching areas.
- v. The  accommodation  manager  is  responsible  for  the  cleanliness  and  organization  of  all  the students and staff accommodations.

## Residential Houses

- i. These establishments include old-age homes, nursing homes, and recuperation homes destitute children's homes, sanatorium, and homes for mentally or physically challenged. These may be privately owned or run by a local authority. The residents here could themselves be involved in housekeeping activities according to their capabilities with the help of the cleaning staff.

## Art Galleries, Museums, Libraries, and Archives

- i. The scope of housekeeping at these establishments includes maintaining display areas exhibits, old  books,  documents  and  manuscripts.  Particular  problem  include  dust  control  across extensive  areas  of  shelves  and  a  quantity  of  books  and  also  control  of  UV-ray  exposure  to prevent deterioration of documents.

## Offices

- i. Apart from routine cleaning, additional housekeeping factors here are
- ii. Deep cleaning must be completed before or after office hours.

- iii. Maintenance of indoor plants and flowers must be regularly attended to.
- iv. Disposal of confidential waste must take place by way of a shredder and or incineration.

## SUMMARY

Housekeeping department is the major part of any hotel small, medium or big, because it is the only department which takes care of not only the guest but also the staff and the hotel itself. It helps in the smooth functioning of the operations of the other departments by coordinating and cooperating with these. The prime objective of the department is to provide clean, comfortable, safe environment and maximum satisfaction  to  the  guest.  This  directly  helps  in  making  profit  for  the  hotel  through  more room  sales.  In  this  section,  the  housekeeping  is  defined  in  detail  with  the  key  essence.  The aim/objective  has  been  discussed  in  details  along  with  the  responsibilities  the  housekeeping  staff  is accountable for. The areas of responsibilities are also mentioned here for the better understanding their responsibilities.  The  various  functions  the  housekeeping  workers  perform  in  order  to  achieve  the objective  have  been  described.  Further  the  coordination  and  cooperation  of  the  housekeeping department  with  other  department  have  been  discussed.  At  the  end  the  basic  terminology  of  the housekeeping are given. At last Housekeeping in other institutes has been described.

<!-- image -->