Sanga, John J.

## Article

Hospitality employment perceptions among non-hospitality management students and their implications for subsequent job hire in the industry

Business management review

Provided in Cooperation with:

University of Dar es Salaam (UDSM)

Reference: Sanga, John J. (2020). Hospitality employment perceptions among non-hospitality management students and their implications for subsequent job hire in the industry. In: Business management review 23 (2), S. 32 - 47.

https://journals.udsm.ac.tz/index.php/bmr/article/download/3903/3566.

This Version is available at: http://hdl.handle.net/11159/6260

## Kontakt/Contact

ZBW - Leibniz-Informationszentrum Wirtschaft/Leibniz Information Centre for Economics Düsternbrooker Weg 120 24105 Kiel (Germany) E-Mail: rights[at]zbw.eu

https://www.zbw.eu/econis-archiv/

## Standard-Nutzungsbedingungen:

Dieses Dokument darf zu eigenen wissenschaftlichen Zwecken und zum Privatgebrauch gespeichert und kopiert werden. Sie dürfen dieses Dokument nicht für öffentliche oder kommerzielle Zwecke vervielfältigen, öffentlich ausstellen, aufführen, vertreiben oder anderweitig nutzen. Sofern für das Dokument eine OpenContent-Lizenz verwendet wurde, so gelten abweichend von diesen Nutzungsbedingungen die in der Lizenz gewährten Nutzungsrechte.

<!-- image -->

https://zbw.eu/econis-archiv/termsofuse

<!-- image -->

## Terms of use:

This document may be saved and copied for your personal and scholarly purposes. You are not to copy it for public or commercial purposes, to exhibit the document in public, to perform, distribute or otherwise use the document in public. If the document is made available under a Creative Commons Licence you may exercise further usage rights as specified in the licence.

<!-- image -->

Open Access article distributed in terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License

[CC BY 4.0] (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)

## Hospitality Employment Perceptions among Non-Hospitality Management Students and their Implications for Subsequent Job Hire in the Industry

John J. Sanga 1

## ABSTRACT

This paper analyses the implications for hiring non-hospitality students in the hospitality industry. Specifically,  it  focuses  on  their  perceptions  and  intentions.  It  also  examines  the  role  industry exposure plays in shaping the students' perceptions and intentions towards hospitality employment.  The  data  was  collected  from  final  year  students  studying  business  management programmes at the University of Dar es Salaam in Tanzania. Results show that in general, business management students negatively perceive the tourism industry and associated career prospects. On the other hand, the nature of work, pay and benefits and physical work conditions were found to be insignificant and powerful predictors of students' intentions take up hospitality employment. Results  also  provide  evidence  of  differences  in  students'  intentions  to  embrace  the  hospitality employment based on their industry exposure as students having high industry exposure had more favorable intentions towards hospitality employment than those with low industry exposures. The study  findings  have  major  implications  for  managers  of  hospitality  organizations  in  terms  of gaining knowledge on the applicants' perceptions and attitudes towards the industry during the hiring process, which might help to control employee turnover. The study findings also contribute to  our  understanding  of  students'  perceptions  of  hospitality  employment  by  detailing  the implications they have for hiring practices of hospitality organizations.

Key words: business management students, perceptions, intentions, industry exposure, and hospitality employment.

## INTRODUCTION

Tourism  is  globally  one  of  the  fastest-growing  industries  with  great  potential  for  making  a significant  contribution  to  economic  growth  in  many  countries  through  creation  of  jobs  and generation of more income in general (Amissah, Opoku Mensah, Mensah, &amp; Gamor, 2019). As a business activity, tourism covers all activities aimed to provide goods and services for people who travel to and from a given destination and stay at least overnight away from home for purposes other than employment and taking up permanent residence (Reisinger, 2001). One of the areas in which the industry contributes substantially is employment. Employment has been expanding and evolving overtime with the current global direct employment standing at above 10 percent of the total global employment (WTTC, 2019). In fact, the industry has helped to ease the challenge of high youth unemployment rate many developing countries face. In Tanzania, tourism is one of the major providers of decent jobs (URT, 2016) as it accounts for 605,000 jobs in direct employment, which represents 6.3 percent of total employment in 2019  and  rise further by 6.2% in 2028 (ILO, 2020).

Tourism  is  an  amalgamation  of  services  such  as  hospitality,  transportation,  entertainment, attractions and direct business. As a process of receiving and entertaining travelers with concern

for their well-being and satisfaction, hospitality services constitute a  major segment (Reisinger, 2001). Hospitality consists of accommodation services (lodges, hotels, motels, resorts, etc.,) and catering services (food and beverages). According to Reisinger (2001), hospitality provide the base from which tourists can engage in any activities at the destination . A person travelling to another place to spend a night or more there needs a place to stay and eat. Implicitly, the tourism industry cannot sustain itself without adequate quality hospitality services.   Blomme, Van Rheede, and Tromp  (2009)  contend  that  the  expected  comfort  of  stay,  quality  of  food,  and  kindness  and friendliness of hospitality staff are major determinants of tourists' selection of a destination.

Hospitality is one of the labour-intensive industries, whose growth and prosperity depend upon continued availability and retention of well-trained, skilled, and enthusiastic personnel (Richardson, 2010). Despite the expansion of hospitality education at different levels, organizations have been facing difficulties in attracting and retaining highly-educated candidates (Amissah et al., 2019; Anderson &amp; Sanga, 2019; Brown, Bosselman, &amp; Thomas, 2016; WTTC, 2015). Paradoxically, this problem is apparent even in developing countries with high rates of unemployment (Amissah et al., 2019; Anderson, 2015). The shortage of qualified tourism and hospitality management professionals has forced some hospitality organizations to hire graduates from other fields  not directly connected to the industry (Anderson, 2015), a resourcing strategy that could solve retention problems as indicated in the literature reviewed  (Aruna &amp; Anitha, 2015; Mwasaru &amp; Kazungu, 2015).

Negative  attitudes  towards  hospitality  employment  among  existing  and  potential  employees constitute one of the major causes of employee turnover in the hospitality industry (Amissah et al., 2019;  Brown et  al.,  2016).  Indeed,  many  people  leave  the    industry  because  of  a  discrepancy between the pre-employment expectations and the actuality in their jobs (Daskin, 2016; Grobelna &amp;  Marciszewska,  2016).  Hospitality  employment  is  alleged  to  have  some  inherent  negative attributes that deter students and graduates from developing careers in the industry (Baum et al., 2016; Stone, Padron, Wray, &amp; Olson, 2017). In consequence, there has been growing interest in the  past  three  decades  in  understanding  the  role  graduates'  attitudes  play  in  their  decisions  to commit to the industry, primarily focusing on the students' perceptions and intentions pertaining to  the  hospitality  industry  (Akin  &amp;  Deniz,  2005;  Amissah  et  al.,  2019;  Brown  et  al.,  2016; Kusluvan  &amp;  Kusluvan,  2000;  Richardson,  2010).  Investigating  factors  shaping  students' perceptions and intentions to take up employment in the hospitality industry is crucial to create insights that can enable managers of hospitality organizations to make appropriate choices during the selection process and create a working environment that maximizes the retention of graduates joining the industry.

Despite the effort that has been made thus far to understand students' perceptions of and attitude towards the hospitality employment most of it has focused on hospitality management students. In fact, research involving students from other fields of study such as business management is limited. In  emerging  tourist  destinations  such  as  Tanzania,  where  hospitality  education  is  not  welldeveloped (Anderson &amp; Sanga, 2019), sourcing graduates from fields other than hospitality to meet staffing needs in hospitality organizations has been substantial. Notably, from the literature the focus for most previous studies has been more on the implications of the students' attitudes for education providers than for employers  (Aruna &amp; Anitha, 2015; Mwasaru &amp; Kazungu, 2015). Neglecting non-hospitality management students in this research agenda is a flaw, as these could be one of the sources of increased turnover in the hospitality industry. For instance, because of the generic  nature  of  the  knowledge  and  skills  they  acquire  in  their  specializations,  business

management students have wide career choices upon their graduation, which might complicate their perceptions and intentions to take up employment in the hospitality industry.

After all, extensive research on the perceptions of the hospitality industry conducted using samples drawn from hospitality management students has produced mixed results. Whereas one stream of the findings suggests that students have unfavorable attitudes towards the industry (Amissah et al., 2019;  Daskin,  2016;  Jiang  &amp;  Tribe,  2009;  Kusluvan  &amp;  Kusluvan,  2000),  another  stream  has established that most of the graduates find hospitality to be an interesting career option (Grobelna &amp; Dolot, 2018; Richardson &amp; Butler, 2012). The mixed results suggest that there are other factors that interact with students' perceptions to determine their intentions of whether to work in the hospitality industry. One of these factors, as indicated by the work-integrative learning perspective, is the industry's exposure or experience. The learning through work help to combine theoretical knowledge with  workplace  application  (Freudenberg,  Brimble,  &amp;  Cameron,  2011)    the  workintegrated  learning  perspective  suggests  that  combining  studies  with  industrial  experience improves students' acquisition of skills and attitudes (Grobelna &amp; Dolot, 2018).

As such, the current study contributes to efforts aimed to address the research shortcomings stated above by examining the perceptions and intentions of university business management students in relation to the hospitality employment and the implications they have for hiring practices in the hospitality industry. Moreover, the study also sought to determine whether there is any significant difference in the students' intentions between those with high industry exposure and those with low exposure. Specifically, the study was aimed to: (i) examine business management students' perceptions of hospitality employment and the likelihood that they would commit to hospitality careers upon graduation; and (ii) determine whether there was a difference in intentions among students based on industry exposure. Results provide a basis for drawing implications for hiring and retention practices in the industry which could help practitioners to formulate appropriate strategies for selection of new employees and create a conducive work environment to meet the graduates' expectations.

## LITERATURE REVIEW

The influence of a person's perception of his/her work attitudes  and  behavior  can be wellexplained using Holland's Person-Environment fit model. The notion of Person-Environment (PE) fit is grounded in the interactionist behavioral theory (Lewin, 1951) which postulates that attitudes and behavior are a function of the person and the environment (Lee &amp; Jang, 2017). According  to  the  interaction  theory,  neither  personal  characteristics  nor  environmental attributes  can  singly  adequately  explain  the  variance  in  attitudes  and  behavior,  but  the interaction of the two  can (Ajzen, Czasch, &amp; Flood, 2009; Bednarska, 2016). The notion of PE fit  describes the importance of compatibility between individuals' values and organizations' expectations  of  the  employee.  In  other  words,  every  person  has  a  work environment within which he/she is most compatible. On the one hand, a good fit between an individual's vocational interests, work values, and cognitive abilities and work environmental characteristics increases his or her satisfaction and the likelihood that he/she would remain with the organization in the long-term (Lee &amp; Jang, 2017). On the other hand, a poor fit can lead to negative work outcomes, including lower job satisfaction and organizational commitment which might result in a higher turnover rate (Lee &amp; Jang, 2017).

The PE fit model appears useful in explaining the students' perceptions and intentions on getting employed in specific industries (Bednarska, 2016). It suggests that personal values and needs play

a critical role in students' career choices. Students with certain values are more likely to choose career  paths  that  suit  their  value  orientations.  As  Schneider  (1987)'s  study  established,  an individual's attraction to and remaining in an organization are determined by his/her perception of the  similarity  between  her/his  values  and  needs  and  the  work  environment.  According  to (Bednarska, 2016), the PE fit also encompasses the degree to which individual needs are fulfilled by rewards in a work environment and the extent to which work environmental needs are satiated by individual capabilities.

The literature reviewed suggests that congruence between a person and the environment is critical in attracting and retaining qualified graduates (Bednarska, 2016; Lee &amp; Jang, 2017). When there is a congruence between their personal abilities and needs and job demands and supplies, students are likely to be attracted to developing careers in a particular industry (Bednarska, 2016). Based on the person-environment fit principle, graduates can be satisfied with and adjust most easily to jobs that match with their career-relevant characteristics. Students can also be attracted to and commit themselves to hospitality jobs when their abilities and personal  needs match what the hospitality work environment expects from them and the supplies it can provide.

## Students' perceptions and intentions to work in the hospitality industry

Career research studies on hospitality management students have produced mixed results with some  studies  indicating  that  most  students  are  interested  in  developing  their  career  in  the hospitality industry (Brown et al., 2016; Grobelna, 2012; Stone et al., 2017; Tuzunkan, 2018). For example, studying how undergraduate  event management students perceive a  career in  events management in the US, Stone et al. (2017) established that students were positive about most of the assessed career factors in the event management including interaction with others, an enjoyable job,  responsibility,  excitement,  and  transferable  skills.  In  another  study  involving  final-year students in of various hotel management colleges in India Pol and Patil (2015) found that the majority of students were willing to work in hotel related.

Still, there are other studies which report that the proportion of employees with higher educational qualifications is low in the hospitality industry compared to other industries because a substantial number of graduates leave the industry for alternative employment due to low job satisfaction (Amissah  et  al.,  2019;  Daskin,  2016;  Huang  &amp;  Lo,  2014;  Richardson  &amp;  Thomas,  2012).  For instance, in a study of attitudes of undergraduate tourism and hospitality students to employment in the industry in Cyprus, Daskin (2016) found that more than 40 percent of the students were unwilling to work in the industry. A similar study in Ghana by Amissah et al. (2019) established that students' attitudes were generally unfavorable  to the industry.

Overall,  hospitality  employment  is  characterized  by  unappealing  image,  which  results  from unsocial and long working hours, irregular work schedules, low job security and lack of career advancement opportunities (Baum et al., 2016; Grobelna &amp; Marciszewska, 2016). Jiang and Tribe (2009) assert that by its nature hospitality employment does not encourage graduates to remain in the industry. Consequently, hospitality organizations contend with a chronic problem of failing to retain the best employees (Brown, Thomas, &amp; Bosselman, 2015; Wan, Wong, &amp; Kong, 2014). Thus, the understanding of the factors shaping the students' attitudes towards the industry would be a good starting point for finding solutions towards employee turnover in the industry.

Many different factors have been applicable in assessing the perceptions of tourism and hospitality employment among the existing and potential employees and their relationship with intentions to join the industry for employment. These include reward systems, nature of work, personal needs,

supervision and relationships with their supervisors and among themselves (Jiang &amp; Tribe, 2009; Kusluvan &amp; Kusluvan, 2000; Lundberg, Gudmundson, &amp; Andersson, 2009). For example, in their studies,  Akin  and  Deniz  (2005),  Kusluvan  and  Kusluvan  (2000)  and  Richardson  and  Thomas (2012) used the  of work, social status, industry-person congeniality, physical working conditions, pay and benefits, promotion, co-workers and managers to assess the students' expectations from the tourism industry. In another study, Pol and Patil (2015) used promotion opportunities, respect, career development, good money and secure future to examine the students' perceptions of tourism employment.  The  variables,  nature  of  work,  social  status,  promotion  opportunities  and  salary expectations  were  also  employed  by  Wan  et  al.  (2014)  in  their  examination  of  the  effects  of students' perceptions on the tourism and hospitality industries.

## Role of students' industry exposure

The  mixed  results  have  been  one  of  the  major  reasons  driving  increased  research  interest  in students'  perceptions  of  and  attitudes  to  hospitality  careers  in  the  past  three  decades.  Various studies have suggested that there are some circumstances that shape students' perceptions and, hence, their commitment to the industry (Jiang &amp; Tribe, 2009; Kim &amp; Park, 2013; Richardson &amp; Butler, 2012). Ajzen et al. (2009) suggest that the attitude-behaviour relationship is moderated by factors within that person , the situation in which the behaviour is performed, or characteristics of the  attitude  itself  (p.  18).  Generally,  graduates  have  exhibited  different  attitudes  towards  a hospitality career in different context and settings.

One  of  the  situations  that  may  shape  students'  perceptions  and  intentions  pertaining  to  the hospitality employment, as indicated by the literature reviewed, is industrial exposure. Industrial exposure encompasses acts, information, and skills students acquire through their  interaction with people working in the industry (Grobelna, 2012). This industrial exposure can be gained through different ways including interacting with family members and friends working in the industry, visiting  the  industry,  undertaking  internships  as  part  of  their  programmes,  listening  to  guest lecturers  from  the  industry  and  consuming  products  from  the  industry  (Brown  et  al.,  2015; Grobelna &amp; Marciszewska, 2016; Lin &amp; Anantharajah, 2019). Students, who are quite familiar with the industry's work conditions, are expected to commit to working in the industry more than those who are not. This view is supported by Jackson and Wilton (2017), who assert that more of the students' career decisions are based on real-world experiences and internship than on what they are taught in class. As Lin and Anantharajah (2019) observe, gaining industry exposure  can familiarize students with the employment conditions and culture and encourage them to develop interest and commitment to careers in the industry. Joining the industry without industry exposure, on the other hand, might make students feel that they were over-qualified for the tasks assigned to them, hence be dissatisfied with the job.

The link between industrial exposure and students' hospitality employment intention is conceived from the work-integrated learning perspective, which advocates for learning through work. Workintegrated learning a process which combines theoretical knowledge with workplace application in real industry settings (Freudenberg et al., 2011). As Anderson and Sanga (2019) contend, workintegrated  learning  fosters  partnership  between  students  and  employers,  thereby  enhancing positive work attitudes among students, attributes which facilitate their finding a post-graduation work placement. Grobelna and Dolot (2018) contend that industry experience helps students to develop realistic views on their future jobs and on making proper job decision.

Empirical  studies  that  have  examined  the  role  industry  exposure  plays  in  cultivating  the relationship between students' perceptions and intentions are scarce in the mainstream literature. However, several studies found a difference between students with industry exposure and those without it. For instance, in their study of hospitality students' attitudes towards careers in that industry  in  Taiwan,  Huang and  Lo (2014) found that work experience improved the students' attitudes towards working in the restaurant industry. In another study on tourism and hospitality students by Grobelna and Marciszewska (2016) that was conducted in Poland found that students with work experience in the industry reported having a good understanding of the nature of work more than others. Thus, this study examined the role of industry exposure in influencing students' perceptions or their intentions regarding hospitality employment. In the current study, students were expected to offer different in perceptions and intentions towards hospitality  employment based on their industry exposure.

## RESEARCH METHODS

To  achieve  the  research  objectives,  the  study  employed  a  cross-sectional  case  study  research design. Data were collected from the Business School of the University of Dar es Salaam (UDSM) in Tanzania. The UDSM is the oldest and largest university in Tanzania with a variety of academic programmes offered at  both  the  undergraduate  and  postgraduate  levels.  In  fact,  the  university serves as a model institution to many other universities-both public and private, from which they adopt academic programmes and administrative systems. Thus, the UDSM's  business management students  were  somewhat  representative  of  students  in  many  other  universities  in Tanzania, particularly the public ones.

## Participants

The study involved all the 405 (out of the 564) final-year undergraduate business management students (2018/2019) who had their e-mail addresses indicated in the students' list. In terms of gender, 40.8 percent of the respondents were females. The respondents' age ranged from 20 to 31 years with a mean age of 23 years. Their distribution in academic programmes was as follows: Bachelor of Commerce in Accounting - 45%, Bachelor of Commerce in Finance - 25%, Bachelor of Commerce in Human Resource Management - 7%, Bachelor of Commerce in Marketing 11%,  Bachelor  of  Commerce  in  Tourism  and  Hospitality  Management  -  5%,  and  Bachelor Business Administration - 7%. The sample distribution is proportional to business management students'  enrolment  in  the  UDSM  Business  School  both  in  terms  of  gender  and  academic programmes.

## Data Collection

Data were collected using a survey questionnaire developed by adapting a multi-item attitude scale developed by Kusluvan and Kusluvan (2000), which has also been applied widely in previous studies (Bahcelerli &amp; Sucuoglu, 2015; Richardson, 2010; Wan et al., 2014). As Table 1 illustrates, in addition to demographic information, the instrument had 32 items, 23 items of which described employment conditions, divided into five dimensions (nature of work - 5 items, physical work conditions  -  5  items,  pay  and  benefits  -  5  items,  career  prospects  -  4  items  and  co-worker relationship - 4 items). The sample item for employment conditions was 'It is a widespread belief that pay is low for most jobs in hospitality and tourism'. For the five (5) items on intentions, the statement 'I would be very happy to spend the rest of my career in the hospitality industry' was the sample item. To measure the students' industry exposure, the respondents were required to either agree or disagree with four (4) statements of familiarity with hospitality industry. In this

regard, the sample item was 'I have good knowledge of the hospitality industry because of my engagement in practical training or internship within the industry.'

All the variables were measured using a five-point Likert scale, from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). The questionnaire was e-mailed to the respondents who voluntarily agreed to participate in the study by filling out and sending it back to the researcher electronically. E-mailing the  questionnaire  facilitated  the  reaching  of  a  big  number  of  respondents  within  a  short  time; moreover, all the students had access to and used the internet. Of the 405 e-mails sent out, there were 245 received responses with well-completed questionnaires, a response rate of 60.4 percent.

## Procedures for Data Analysis

Descriptive statistics and multiple linear regression analyses were conducted to determine sample characteristics  and  the  influence  of  the  students'  perceptions  of  the  hospitality  employment attributes on their intentions to assume hospitality employment. T-test was conducted to determine the  students'  perceptions  and  intentions  based  on  their  industry  exposure.  Multiple  regression analysis  was  run  hierarchically  while  controlling  for  the  influence  of  industry  exposure  and students'  demographic  variables.  The  testing  of  the  assumptions  for  multivariate  analysis (normality, linearity, outliers, homogeneity and multicollinearity) was conducted but no serious violations emerged. In conducting the T-test, data on the students' industry exposure Likert scale scores were converted into two categorical groups of low exposure (1 - 3) and high exposure (4 5).

## RESULTS

## Descriptive Statistics

This  study  focused  mainly  on  examining  the  influence  of  students'  perceptions  of  hospitality employment on their career intentions in the industry and whether their intentions varied based on their industry exposure. The average of the 5-point Likert-type scale was computed to obtain scores for each employment attribute. The mean scores and standard deviations are as shown in Table 1 . Table 1 shows that the mean scores ranged from 2.72 (SD = 0.83) for 'career prospects' to 3.20 (SD = 0.80) for 'co-worker relationship.' These scores suggest that most of the students have unfavorable  perceptions  of  employment  in  the  hospitality  industry.  The  mean  score  of  career intention was 3.12 (SD = 0.74), which is slightly above the neutral point on the 5-point Likert scale, implying that students are generally not committed to working in the industry on long-term basis.

Table 1: Means, Correlations, and Composite Reliability Coefficients

| Factor                  |   # of  Items |   Mean |   SD | 1       | 2       | 3       | 4       | 5       | 6    |
|-------------------------|---------------|--------|------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|------|
| Nature of Work          |             5 |   2.75 | 0.6  | 0.81    |         |         |         |         |      |
| Physical Work Condition |             5 |   3.08 | 0.93 | .530 ** | 0.75    |         |         |         |      |
| Pay and Benefits        |             5 |   2.8  | 0.77 | .498 ** | .537 ** | 0.90    |         |         |      |
| Career Prospects        |             4 |   2.72 | 0.83 | .479 ** | .451 ** | .471 ** | 0.83    |         |      |
| Co-Worker Relationship  |             4 |   3.2  | 0.8  | .405 ** | .386 ** | .480 ** | .580 ** | 0.83    |      |
| Intention to Employment |             5 |   3.12 | 0.74 | .580 ** | .543 ** | .533 ** | .680 ** | .490 ** | 0.84 |

The correlation coefficients, reliability coefficients presented in Table 1 show that all the study measures had acceptable reliability and reasonable correlations to allow for regression analysis. Pallant  (2010)  suggests,  regression  analysis  requires  independent  variables  to  have  strong relationship with the dependent variable (  ≥ 0.3) and some relationship among themselves but r which is not too high (  &lt; 0.7). As Table 1 shows, all the correlation coefficients indicate that this r condition was met and hence regression could be conducted given that the other assumptions were also met.

## Students' perceptions of hospitality employment and their likelihood of work in industry

Results on students' perceptions and intentions towards hospitality employment are summarized in Table 2 . On a scale of 1 to 5, 4-5 indicate positive perceptions, 1-2 indicate negative perceptions, and 3 indicates neutrality or being non-committal. Overall, students reported unfavorable views on different  attributes  of  employment  in  the  hospitality  industry.  Specifically,  the  respondents classified  the nature  of  work in  the  hospitality  industry  as  unfavorable.  As Table  2 further illustrates, the percentage of the respondents reporting dissatisfaction (38.2%) with the nature of work in the hospitality industry was higher than that of those citing satisfaction (26.7%) with 35.1 percent of the respondents being undecided.

Respondents largely perceived the pay and benefits in the tourism industry rather negatively. Many of the respondents (40%) disagreed with the statement that pay and benefits were high enough for employees to maintain a normal life for most of the hospitality jobs. Only 29 percent concurred with the statement. Another 30.5 percent of the respondents were non-committal. Regarding career prospects , the results show that business management students did not perceive career prospects in  the  hospitality  industry  favorably.  Another  37.1  percent  indicated  non-satisfaction  with  the career  prospects  compared  to  28  percent  of  those  who  agreed  that  the  industry  provided opportunities for career advancement.

On  the  positive  side,  physical  work  conditions  and  co-worker  relationship  were  evaluated positively by a large proportion of the business management students compared to those who did so negatively. Specifically, the percentage of favorably he respondents expressing satisfaction with the physical working conditions in the hospitality industry (36.5) was somewhat higher than that of those who reported dissatisfaction (35.1) with 28.1 percent of the respondents indicating that they were undecided (see Table 2 ). In general, the respondents had positive views on co-worker relationship. A significant proportion of the respondents (35.5%) described co-worker relationship as being good compared to those who indicated otherwise (29.8%) with 34.7 percent who were indifferent.  These findings are consistent with the mean values presented in Table 1 .

Perceptions and intentions of business management students regardingTable 2: hospitality employment

| Construct                          |   Strongly  Disagree (%) |   Disagree  (%) |   Indifferent  (%) |   Agree  (%) |   Strongly  Agree (%) |
|------------------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------|--------------------|--------------|-----------------------|
| nature of work                     |                      2.9 |            37.3 |               34.1 |         26.3 |                   0.4 |
| physical work condition            |                      1.1 |            34   |               28.3 |         34.4 |                   2.2 |
| pay and benefits                   |                      1.2 |            34.3 |               33.5 |         28.6 |                   2.4 |
| career prospects                   |                      5.7 |            31.4 |               35   |         26.4 |                   1.6 |
| co-worker relationship             |                      0.8 |            29   |               34.7 |         31.2 |                   4.3 |
| Intention to work in the  industry |                      0.5 |            30.8 |               36.1 |         31.1 |                   1.5 |

Table 3: Regression Coefficients of the Influence Hospitality Employment Attributes on Students' Intentions

|                   | Low Exposure   | Low Exposure   | High Exposure   | High Exposure   |
|-------------------|----------------|----------------|-----------------|-----------------|
|                   | Frequency      | %              | Frequency       | %               |
| Industry exposure | 140            | 57.1           | 105             | 42.9            |

Regarding whether students expected to work in the hospitality industry upon their graduation, the respondents  were  almost  evenly  distributed.  Whereas  32.6  percent  of  respondents  indicated willingness to work in the industry, 31.3 percent unequivocally indicated that they would not do so. Additionally, a significant proportion of business management students were undecided on whether they would develop their career in the hospitality industry upon graduation. Combining these results with the mean value of students' intentions presented in Table 1 shows that, generally the  business  management  students'  perceptions  and  intentions  when  it  comes  to  hospitality employment were unfavorable.

Furthermore, Table 2 shows that 42.4 percent  of  the  respondents  reported  that  they  had  good experience in the hospitality industry during practical training or internship, conversations with relatives  or  close  friends  working  in  the  hospitality  industry,  being  a  customer  of  services  of hospitality goods and services, and attending hospitality-related lectures, seminars and conferences.

## Influence of students' perceptions on hospitality industry employment intentions

Standard regression analysis was used to determine how well the employment attributes predicted students' intentions to work in the hospitality industry and which one among the attributes was the best  predictor  of  students'  intentions.  Prior  to  conducting  regression  analysis,  assumptions  of normality, linearity, multicollinearity, and homoscedasticity were checked to ensure that that there was no violation. Summated values of students' perceptions of the five employment attributes were regressed against the summated values of career intentions while controlling for the effects of industry exposure, academic programme, age and gender.

## ANOVA

|            |   Sum of Squares |   df | Mean Square   | F      | Sig.   | R Square   |
|------------|------------------|------|---------------|--------|--------|------------|
| Regression |         2486.82  |    9 | 276.313       | 74.003 | .000 b | .584       |
| Residual   |          877.449 |  235 | 3.734         |        |        |            |
| Total      |         3364.27  |  244 |               |        |        |            |

## Coefficients

| Model   | Independent Variables   | Beta   |      t |   Sig. |
|---------|-------------------------|--------|--------|--------|
| 1       | (Constant)              |        |  0.983 |  0.326 |
|         | Nature of Work          | .226   |  4.08  |  0     |
|         | Pay and Benefits        | .153   |  2.864 |  0.005 |
|         | Physical Work Condition | .125   |  2.124 |  0.035 |
|         | Career Prospects        | .389   |  7.005 |  0     |
|         | Co-worker Relationship  | .022   |  0.424 |  0.672 |
|         | Industry Exposure       | .241   |  6.009 |  0     |
|         | Gender                  | -.010  | -0.248 |  0.804 |

| Age                |   -.022 |   -0.460 |   .646 |
|--------------------|---------|----------|--------|
| Academic Programme |   0.169 |    3.435 |  0.001 |

As Table 3 illustrates, four of the five hospitality employment attributes had statistically significant and positive bearing on students' intentions to work in the industry. These are nature of work ( beta = 0.226, p &lt; .001), pay and benefits ( beta = 0.153, p &lt; .001), physical work conditions ( beta = 0.125, p &lt;  .01),  and  career  prospects  ( beta =  0.389, p &lt;  .001).  On  the  other  hand,  co-worker relationships did not have a significant effect on their intentions to work in the hospitality industry ( beta = -0.022, p = .672).  The statistically significant attributes included career prospects ( beta = 0.389, p &lt; .001), and nature of work ( beta = 0.216, p &lt; .001). These two attributes appear to be the strongest predictors of students' intentions to working in the hospitality industry.

The total variance in students' intentions to work in the tourism and hospitality industry explained by the perceived hospitality employment factors was 58.4% ( Rsquared = 0.584, p &lt; .001). The statistically significant regression coefficients for the four hospitality employment factors indicate that  the  higher  the  level  of  perceived  hospitality  employment  factors,  the  higher  the  students' intention to work in the tourism industry.

## Comparison of Students' Perceptions and Intentions regarding Hospitality Employment based on Industry Exposure

An independent-sample t-test was conducted to compare the intentions to develop a career in the hospitality  industry  for  students  with  high  and  those  with  low  industry  exposure.  This  test established a statistically significant difference as the  p-score (2-tailed) is less than 0.05 (Pallant, 2010). In fact, results show a significant difference in the mean scores of intentions for students with  high  and  those  with  low  industry  exposure  as  indicated  in Table 4 .  The  findings  further indicate that students also differ significantly in their perceptions of employment attributes with those having high industry exposure exhibiting more favorable views than those with low industry exposure.

Table 4: Comparison of Students' Perception of and Intentions for hospitality employment based on Industry Exposure

| Variables                   | Low  Exposure   | Low  Exposure   | High  Exposure   | High  Exposure   | Levene's  Test for  Equality of   | Levene's  Test for  Equality of   | t-test for Equality of Means   | t-test for Equality of Means   | t-test for Equality of Means   | t-test for Equality of Means   | Effect  Size  (ETA)   |
|-----------------------------|-----------------|-----------------|------------------|------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------|
|                             | Mean            | SD              | Mean             | SD               | F                                 | Sig.                              | t                              | df                             | Sig. (2- tailed)               | Mean  Difference               |                       |
| Intention to                | 12.04           | 2.03            | 17.92            | 2.62             | 5.6                               | .018                              | 19.7                           | 243                            | .000                           | 5.881                          | 2.56                  |
| Employment  Nature of  Work | 12.61           | 2.32            | 15.30            | 3.11             | 9.4                               | .002                              | 7.7                            | 243                            | .000                           | 2.698                          | 0.96                  |
| Physical Work  Conditions   | 12.01           | 4.12            | 15.89            | 4.45             | 2.9                               | .089                              | 6.9                            | 214                            | .000                           | 3.871                          | 0.90                  |
| Pay and                     | 12.43           | 2.68            | 16.10            | 4.16             | 28.                               | .000                              | 8.3                            | 243                            | .000                           | 3.676                          | 1.02                  |
| Career                      | 11.44           | 3.40            | 16.46            | 3.33             | .05                               | .811                              | 11.5                           | 227                            | .000                           | 5.021                          | 1.49                  |

| Co-worker    | 10.09   | 2.68   | 3.25   | 5.4   | .021   | 6.8   | 243   | .000   | 2.600   | 0.86   |
|--------------|---------|--------|--------|-------|--------|-------|-------|--------|---------|--------|
| Relationship |         |        |        |       |        |       |       |        |         |        |

Effect sizes were also computed to compare quantitatively the mean-score results as recommended by McLeod (2019). Effect sizes measure the magnitude of differences between group means. As Table 4 illustrates, the sizes of the difference computed using Cohen's d coefficient were large for all  the  employment  attributes  (nature  of  work  t =  7.76; d =  0.96; p &lt;  .001;  Physical  Work Conditions -   = 6.94; t d = 0.90; p &lt; .001; Pay and Benefits -   = 8.38; t d = 1.02; p &lt; .001; and Career Prospects -   = 17.59; t d = 1.49; p &lt; .001) and intentions towards hospitality employment ( t = 19.77; d = 2.56; p &lt; .001). All the Cohen's d coefficients were above the recommended d ≥ 0.80 for large effect (McLeod, 2019).

These findings suggest that industry exposure affects students' intentions regarding hospitality employment. Specifically, the findings imply that students with industry exposure have positive attitudes towards the hospitality employment as compared to those without it.

## DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATION FOR HIRING PRACTICES

This study investigated the undergraduate business management students' perceptions of different employment attributes and their intentions regarding working in the hospitality industry using a reliable and valid attitude scale. One important result emerging from the study was that, generally, students had negative views on hospitality employment. Generally, results indicate that business management  students  perceived  the  hospitality  employment  unfavorably.  In  fact,  for  most employment attributes the proportion of respondents perceiving hospitality employment negatively was higher than that of those who were in favor of it. These findings are congruent with some  of  the  studies  around  the  world  that  established  negative  attitudes  towards  tourism  and hospitality  careers  among tourism and hospitality management students  (Amissah et al., 2019; Daskin, 2016; Huang &amp; Lo, 2014; Jiang &amp; Tribe, 2009; Kusluvan &amp; Kusluvan, 2000; Richardson &amp; Thomas, 2012).  However, the findings of this study contrast with the results from studies on tourism and hospitality management students by Brown et al. (2016), Stone et al. (2017), Tuzunkan (2018), and Wijesundara (2015), which found students to have keen interest in getting employed in the industry. Results also show that more than one-third of students (33.1%) were uncertain about whether to commit to the industry or not. This result, however, has to be taken cautiously because these students might turn out to be behind turnover once employed in the industry upon graduation. Arguably, business management students have a negative impression of the hospitality industry with only a little proportion of the students having favorable attitudes.

The findings further show that four out of five hospitality employment factors (nature of work, career prospects, pay and benefits and physical work conditions) positively influence students' intentions to work in the hospitality industry. The results of this study are, to a large extent, in line with the findings of previous studies  (Harkison, Poulston, &amp; Ginny Kim, 2011; Kim &amp; Park, 2013; Richardson, 2010; Tuzunkan, 2018; Wan et al., 2014; Wijesundara, 2015), which established that students' perceptions of employment factors such as nature of work, physical work conditions, pay and  benefits,  co-worker  relationship,  and  career  prospects  were  significant  predictors  of  their hospitality  employment  intentions.  Being  aware  of  different  factors  on  which  students'  and employees' perceptions are based is important for managers of hospitality organizations to identify candidates likely to enter and stay in hospitality workforce. In accordance with the interactionist behavioral theory, a positive fit between a job applicant and the organization can benefit both the employee and the organization in the long-run.

Moreover, the study found that students differed in their perceptions and intensions pertaining to hospitality employment based on their industry exposure. Students with high industry exposure are attracted more to hospitality employment than those lacking such industrial experience. This study supports the findings by Walsh, Chang, and Tse (2015) and Jackson and Wilton (2017), which established that industry exposure is a vital determinant of the students' perceptions of and attitudes to the tourism and hospitality industry. The findings are contrary to those of studies by Kusluvan and Kusluvan (2000) as well as Akin and Deniz (2005), which found that students' industry experience has a negative impact on their perceptions of and attitude to the hospitality industry.

Yet, business management graduates are employed in hospitality organizations in good numbers. Three major implications for hospitality organizations emerge from this study's findings. First, the findings highlight the importance  for managers  of  hospitality organizations to gain an understanding of the perceptions and experience with the industry of candidates examined for jobs prior to employing them. Doing so could enable them to select suitable and committed candidates (graduates)  at  the  entry  point,  hence  reduce  the  chances  of  turnover.  In  assessing  candidates' perceptions, especially those of fresh graduates, the study found that employment factors such as nature of work, career prospects, physical work environment and pay and benefits are crucial, hence deserving consideration.

Second, hospitality managers should strive towards improving the industry's work conditions to retain the best students once they join the industry and competing favorably with organizations in other sectors for the same pool of graduates. Since they cannot relatively offer lucrative jobs, they should focus on providing intrinsic rewards that offer enough excitement to attract students to the industry.  The  selection  process  should  also  include  comprehensive  orientation  programmes  to clarify expectations among newly-employed staff.

Overall,  the  results  from  the  study  show  that  industry  exposure  is  significant  in  influencing students'  hospitality  employment  intentions.  Students  with  high  industry  exposure  do  have  a higher intention scores than those with low industry exposure. Implicitly, managers of hospitality organizations should include, in their selection process questions that test candidates' experience or  familiarity  with  the  industry  especially  for  non-hospitality  professional  candidates  because, normally,  these  have  alternative  career  options  in  the  labour  market.  On  their  side,  educators should  develop  platforms  to  provide  students  with  opportunities  to  get  acclimatized  with  the industry so that they could find working in the industry in long-term attractive. As such, ways should  be  found  for  students  to  associate  with  hospitality  organizations  for  them  to  become interested  in  working  in  the  industry.  Moreover,  managers  of  hospitality  organizations  can facilitate the students' industry exposure by taking them in for internship, organizing hospitality employment workshops, and offering professional lectures in academic and training institutions on voluntary basis.

## CONCLUSION

The  study  findings  confirm  results  from  previous  studies  which  suggest  that  students  have generally negative perceptions of employment in the hospitality industry, which negatively affects their interest in working in the industry as indicated by the below-average scores of their intention to work in the industry. Moreover, they echo the theoretical perspective that person-environment fit determines individual attitude and behavior. In effect, business management students do not find a match between what they believe and need out of employment and what hospitality can

provide which influences their decisions on whether they should join the industry or not. Results also provide evidence that the nature of work, pay and benefits, physical work conditions and career prospects are major employment attributes that prompt students to develop their perceptions of the hospitality industry. The findings also reveal that industry exposure plays a significant role in shaping the students' perceptions of and hospitality employment intentions. In fact, the higher their industry exposure favorable is students' perceptions, the more they are attracted to developing a career in the hospitality industry.

The current study has extended the line of inquiry by involving business management students from  an  African  country  context  which  has  been  under-researched  (Amissah  et  al.,  2019; Kamoche, Siebers, Mamman, &amp; Newenham-Kahindi, 2015). Indeed, most empirical evidence on the effects of students' perceptions of hospitality employment has been largely confined to students studying tourism and hospitality management programmes and have been conducted, mostly, in developed Western and Asian countries. As stated earlier, the study had a systematic examination of  students'  perceptions  of  and  attitude  to  tourism  employment  using  a  sample  drawn  from business management students in an African country. Moreover, it focused on the employers as opposed to the common practice among researchers of students' attitudes who focus on educators. Hus, the insights generated in this study could help managers of hospitality organizations to select the best and committed candidates to work in the industry. Overall, the findings of the current study provide insights into the role students' perceptions and industry exposure in shaping their hospitality  employment  intentions  using  a  sample  of  business  management  students  from  a Tanzanian premier public university.

## LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY AND DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH

Like in many other research studies, this study had some limitations which might have limited the generalizability of its findings. First, participants came from only one institution, the UDSM. Thus, the study findings may not be generalizable to all students or graduates in the country without qualification. As such, future studies should engage more universities and students in different programmes. Second, as most of the students had no industry exposure, which might raise doubts on their perceptions of the hospitality industry and employment, our main aim was to determine whether  industry  exposure  improved  the  students'  perceptions,  which  has  been  positively confirmed.

Third, the current  study  employed  cross-sectional  case  study  design  in  the  examination  of  the determinants of the students' intentions regarding the hospitality employment, which might have not fully established a cause and effect relationships between the study variables. Thus, conducting a longitudinal study of students' perceptions of and intentions on the hospitality employment from the  entry  point  through  to  graduation  and  beyond  could  lead  to  appropriate  conclusions  being drawn on the effects of students' perceptions of their career intentions. Forth, it was expected based on the Interactionist Behavioral Theory (Lewin, 1951) and findings from previous studies that as part of employment attributes, co-worker relationship would influence students' intention to work in the hospitality industry. However, this study's results indicate co-worker relationship was an insignificant predictor of students' intentions. Future studies should explore on why coworker  relationship  does  influence  students'  intentions  towards  hospitality  employment including  finding  out  whether  there  are  any  intervening  factors  in  this  relationship.  which postulates that attitudes and behavior are a function of the person and the environment (Lee &amp; Jang, 2017).

Finally, students' perception of hospitality employment factors and industry exposure explain only a portion of their attitude towards hospitality employment. Impliedly, there must be other factors that  might  also  affect  their  attitudes  to  hospitality  employment.  Other  factors  might  include, students' personal values, social status, emotional intelligence, tourism service orientation, and peer  influence.  Future  studies  should,  hence,  incorporate  these  factors  in  the  examination  of students' perceptions.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This paper was written as part of the training on advanced scientific writing sponsored by Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA). Thanks to SIDA and the facilitators.

## REFERENCES

Ajzen,  I.,  Czasch,  C.,  &amp;  Flood,  M.  G.  (2009).  From  Intentions  to  Behavior:  Implementation Intention, Commitment, and Conscientiousness 1. Journal of applied social psychology, 39 (6), 1356-1372.

Ajzen, I., &amp; Fishbein, M. (2005). The influence of attitudes on behavior. The handbook of attitudes, 173 (221), 31.

Akin, A. A., &amp; Deniz, K. C. (2005). Perceptions and attitudes of tourism students in Turkey. International journal of contemporary hospitality management, 17 (5), 436-447.

Amissah, E. F., Opoku Mensah, A., Mensah, I., &amp; Gamor, E. (2019). Students' Perceptions of Careers in Ghana's Hospitality and Tourism Industry. Journal of Hospitality &amp; Tourism Education , 1-13.

Anderson, W. (2015). Human resource needs and skill gaps in the tourism and hospitality sector in  Tanzania .  Consultancy  Report submitted to The Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MEST). Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. Retrieved on 10 July 2020.

Anderson, W., &amp; Sanga, J. J. (2019). Academia-industry partnerships for hospitality and tourism education in Tanzania. Journal of Hospitality &amp; Tourism Education, 31 (1), 34-48.

Aruna, M., &amp; Anitha, J. (2015). Employee retention enablers: Generation Y employees. SCMS Journal of Indian Management, 12 (3), 94-103.

Bahcelerli, N. M., &amp; Sucuoglu, E. (2015). Undergraduate tourism students' opinions regarding the work  conditions  in  the  tourism  industry. Procedia  Economics  and  Finance,  26 (2015), 1130-1135.

Baum, T., Cheung, C., Kong, H., Kralj, A., Mooney, S., Ramachandran, S., Dropulić, R., M, &amp; Siow, M., L. (2016). Sustainability and the tourism and hospitality workforce: A thematic analysis. Sustainability, 8 (8), 1-21.

Bednarska,  M.  (2016).  Complementary  person-environment  fit  as  a  predictor  of  job  pursuit intentions in the service industry. Contemporary Economics, 10 (1), 27-38.

Blomme,  R.,  Van  Rheede,  A.,  &amp;  Tromp,  D.  (2009).  The  hospitality  industry:  an  attractive employer? An exploration of students' and industry workers' perceptions of hospitality as a career field. Journal of Hospitality &amp; Tourism Education, 21 (2), 6-14.

Brown, E. A., Bosselman, R. H., &amp; Thomas, N. J. (2016). Are hospitality graduates making too many compromises? What they give up may lead to turnover. Journal of Human Resources in Hospitality and Tourism, 15 (2), 133-146.

Brown, E. A., Thomas, N. J., &amp; Bosselman, R. H. (2015). Are they leaving or staying: A qualitative analysis  of  turnover  issues  for  Generation  Y  hospitality  employees  with  a  hospitality education. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 46 , 130-137.

Daskin, M. (2016). Tourism Students' Career Conceptions towards Service Industry Profession A Case Study from Human Resource Perspective. Paper presented at the International HR Conference, Sri Jayewardenepura.

Freudenberg, B., Brimble, M., &amp; Cameron, C. (2011). WIL and generic skill development: The development of business students' generic skills through work-integrated learning. AsiaPacific Journal of Cooperative Education, 12 (2), 79-93.

Grobelna, A. (2012). Undergraduate students' attitudes towards their future jobs in the tourism sector: challenges facing educators and business. Paper presented at the ICMLG2016-4th International Conference on Management, Leadership and Governance: ICMLG2016.

Grobelna,  A.,  &amp;  Dolot,  A.  (2018).  The  Role  of  Work  Experience  in  Studying  and  Career Development  in  Tourism:  A  Case  Study  of  Tourism  and  Hospitality  Students  from Northern Poland. Entrepreneurial Business and Economics Review, 6 (4), 217-229.

Grobelna, A., &amp; Marciszewska, B. (2016). Work motivation of tourism and hospitality students: implications for human resource management. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 8th European Conference on Intellectual Capital, ECIC.

Harkison, T., Poulston, J., &amp; Ginny Kim, J.-H. (2011). Hospitality graduates and managers: the big divide. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 23 (3), 377392.

Huang, C., &amp; Lo, R. (2014). Perceptions, attitudes, and needs of undergraduate student towards career in the hospitality industry: An example from the undergraduate students in Taiwan Shoufu University. Journal of International Management Studies, 9 (2), 20-32.

ILO. (2020). Sub-regional tripartite workshop on the promotion of the ILO Guidelines on decent work and socially responsible tourism [Press release]

Jackson,  D.,  &amp;  Wilton,  N.  (2017).  Perceived  employability  among  undergraduates  and  the importance  of  career  self-management,  work  experience  and  individual  characteristics. Higher Education Research Development, 36 (4), 747-762.

Jiang,  B.,  &amp;  Tribe,  J.  (2009).  'Tourism  jobs-short  lived  professions':  Student  attitudes  towards tourism careers in China. Journal of Hospitality, Leisure, Sports and Tourism Education (Pre-2012), 8 (1), 4-19.

Kamoche, K., Siebers, L. Q., Mamman, A., &amp; Newenham-Kahindi, A. (2015). The dynamics of managing  people  in  the  diverse  cultural  and  institutional  context  of  Africa. Personnel review, 44 (3), 330-345.

Kim,  H.-b.,  &amp;  Park,  E.  J.  (2013).  The  role  of  social  experience  in  undergraduates'  career perceptions through internships. Journal of hospitality, leisure, sport &amp; tourism education, 12 (1), 70-78.

Kusluvan, S., &amp; Kusluvan, Z. (2000). Perceptions and attitudes of undergraduate tourism students towards working in the tourism industry in Turkey. Tourism Management, 21 (3), 251-269. doi:10.1016/S0261-5177(99)00057-6

Lee, S., &amp; Jang, E. (2017). The relationships of person-organization fit and person-job fit with work  attitudes:  A  moderating  effect  of  person-supervisor  fit. Journal  of  Engineering Applied Sciences, 12 (14), 3767-3778.

Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science . New York: McGraw-Hill.

Lin, C. Y., &amp; Anantharajah, S. (2019). Perceived Expectations of Internships: Case Study of a Private University in Malaysia. Asia-Pacific Journal of Innovation in Hospitality Tourism, 8 (1), 1-16.

Lundberg, C., Gudmundson, A., &amp; Andersson, T. D. (2009). Herzberg's Two-Factor Theory of work  motivation  tested  empirically  on  seasonal  workers  in  hospitality  and  tourism. Tourism Management, 30 (6), 890-899.

McLeod,  S.  A.  (2019). What  does  effect size tell you? Retrieved 20 January 2020 https://www.simplypsychology.org/effect-size.html

Mwasaru, H., &amp; Kazungu, W. K. (2015). Effects of employee retention strategies on organizational competitive advantage in the hotel industry in Mombasa County. International Journal of Research in Commerce &amp; Management, 6 (3), 1-4.

Pallant, J. (2010). SPSS Survival Manual: A Step By Step Guide to Data Analysis Using SPSS . New York: McGraw-Hill International.

Pol, P., &amp; Patil, H. (2015). Perception of Final Year Hotel Management Students towards Working in Hotel Industry. Atithya: A Journal of Hospitality, 1 (2), 53-54.

Reisinger,  Y.  (2001).  Concepts  of  tourism,  hospitality,  and  leisure  services. Service  quality management in hospitality, tourism, and leisure , 1-14.

Richardson, S. (2010). Tourism and hospitality students' perceptions of a career in the industry: a comparison  of  domestic  (Australian)  students  and  international  students  studying  in Australia. Journal of Hospitality &amp; Tourism Management, 17 (1), 1-11.

Richardson,  S.,  &amp;  Butler,  G.  (2012).  Attitudes  of  Malaysian  tourism  and  hospitality  students' towards a career in the industry. Asia Pacific Journal of Tourism Research, 17 (3), 262276.

Richardson, S., &amp; Thomas, N. J. (2012). Utilising generation Y: United States hospitality and tourism students' perceptions of careers in the industry. Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Management, 19 (2012), 1-13.

Schneider, B. (1987). The people make the place. Personnel psychology, 40 (3), 437-453.

Stone, M. J., Padron, T. C., Wray, M. L., &amp; Olson, E. D. (2017). Career desires and expectations of event management students. Journal of Hospitality &amp; Tourism Management, 32 , 45-53.

Tuzunkan,  D.  (2018).  Undergraduate  Tourism  Students'  Perceptions  and  Attitudes  towards Tourism  Industry:  The  Case  of  Daejeon,  South  Korea. GeoJournal  of  Tourism  and Geosites, 21 (1), 103-111.

URT.  (2016). Second  Five  Year  Development  Plan  Nurturing  Industrialization  for  Economic Transformation and Human Development .

Walsh,  K.,  Chang,  S.,  &amp;  Tse,  E.  C.-Y.  (2015).  Understanding  students'  intentions  to  join  the hospitality industry: The role of emotional intelligence, service orientation, and industry satisfaction. Cornell Hospitality Quarterly, 56 (4), 369-382.

Wan,  Y.  K.  P.,  Wong,  I.  A.,  &amp;  Kong,  W.  H.  (2014).  Student  career  prospect  and  industry commitment: The roles of industry attitude, perceived social status, and salary expectations. Tourism Management, 40 , 1-14.

Wijesundara, W. (2015). An evaluation of graduates' perception on employment in tourism and hospitality industry. Tourism, Leisure Global Change, 2 (1), 172-182.

WTTC. (2015). Global Talent Trends and Issues  for the Travel &amp; Tourism Sector . Retrieved from London, UK:

WTTC. (2019). Travel  and  Tourism  Economic  Impact  2019 .  Retrieved  from  London,  United Kingdom: www.wttc.org