<!-- image -->

## Customer Satisfaction in Hotel Services

Case-Lake Kivu Serena Hotel

Joleen Bizi Mubiri

Bachelor's thesis May , 2016 School of Service and Business Management Degree Programme in Facility Management

Jyväskylän ammattikorkeakoulu JAMK University of Applied Sciences

Author(s)

Joleen Bizi Mubiri

Type of publication Bachelor's Thesis

Date:

Language of publication: English

English sion for web pub- Permis lication: x

Pages

47

Title of publication

## Customer Satisfaction in Hotel Services

Case: Lake Kivu Serena Hotel

Degree Programme

Degree Programme in Facility Management

Tutor(s)

Hukkanen Anita

Assigned by Lake Kivu Serena Hotel

## Abstract

The purpose of this thesis was to investigate how customer satisfaction enhances customer loyalty in hotels. Specifically, the thesis used Lake Kivu Serena Hotel as a case study. Customer retention is achieved by involving customers in improving the quality of services offered by a hotel. Moreover, customers feel appreciated when they realize that the hotel is committed to improving their experience.

Qualitative and quantitative methods of research were used to collect the data for the research. This included collecting both primary and secondary data to make the research comprehensive and credible. Interviews and questionnaires were used to collect first-hand information while a review of the past literature provided the secondary data.

From the findings of the research it is evident that there are many factors influencing customer satisfaction. However, the major factors that influence satisfaction include the quality of services offered by a hotel as well as customer relationship management.

The findings of the research are intended to assist hoteliers to concentrate on customer satisfaction through strategies such as good customer relationships management and improvement of the quality of their services. On the other hand, there is need for further research on all the factors that affect customer satisfaction. This will enable hotel managers to strike a balance between profitability and customer retention.

## Keywords/tags

customer satisfaction, customer loyalty, accommodation services, hotel industry

Miscellaneous:

customer relationship management,

## Contents

Table 1 Difference between service quality and customer satisfaction .................................... 17

| INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................  5                  | INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................  5   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1.1                                                                                                                                 | Research Questions  ..........................................................................................  9    |
| 1.2                                                                                                                                 | Lake Kivu Serena Hotel  .................................................................................  10        |
| 2 Customer Satisfaction and CRM  ..........................................................................  12                     |                                                                                                                      |
| 2.1                                                                                                                                 | Customer Satisfaction, service quality and customer expectations  ...............  12                                |
| 2.2                                                                                                                                 | Customer Relationship Management (CRM) ................................................  20                          |
| 3 Research Design ...................................................................................................  23           |                                                                                                                      |
| 3.1                                                                                                                                 | Data Collection ..............................................................................................  24   |
| 3.2                                                                                                                                 | Data Analysis  .................................................................................................  26 |
| 4 Research Results...................................................................................................  27           |                                                                                                                      |
| 5 Conclusion  ............................................................................................................  31      |                                                                                                                      |
| Reflections on the research.......................................................................................  31              |                                                                                                                      |
| Recommendation  ......................................................................................................  32          |                                                                                                                      |
| 6 Discussion ............................................................................................................  34       |                                                                                                                      |
| 6.1 Organizational chart of Serena Hotel ............................................................  36                           |                                                                                                                      |
| 6.2 Analysis of the Results ..................................................................................  37                  |                                                                                                                      |
| References ....................................................................................................................  44 |                                                                                                                      |
| Appendices ...................................................................................................................  46  |                                                                                                                      |
| Appendice 1.                                                                                                                        | Consent Email .................................................................................  46                  |
| Appendice 2.                                                                                                                        | Interview Questions ........................................................................  46                     |
| Appendice 3.                                                                                                                        | Questionnaires  .................................................................................  47                |
| Tables                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                      |

| Figures                                                                                                                                              |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Figure 2 Lake Kivu Serena Hotel Meeting Room  ................................................................................ 11                    |
| Figure 3 Satisfaction Vs Retention Graph ............................................................................................ 30             |
| Figure 4  Chart of Serena Hotel  ................................................................................................................ 36 |
| Figure 5 Customer Loyalty Vs Customer Satisfaction....................................................................... 37                         |

## 1 INTRODUCTION

## Background of the research

The hotel industry has been one of the most competitive industries especially in the 21st century. For this reason, enhancing customer loyalty is one of the key aspects of enhancing competitiveness in the industry as well as ensuring business continuity. Lake Kivu Serena Hotel is one of the major players in the hospitality industry in Rwanda. The hotel has the advantage of operating under the prosperous Serena group of hotels that enables global marketing of the brand and developing universal strategies to improve its competitiveness globally. However, operating under the Serena Group of hotels is not a guarantee that Lake Kivu Serena Hotel will remain prosperous forever. This is where the question of customer satisfaction and customer loyalty comes in (Szwarc, 2005).

In the event that customers are satisfied with products or brands, they most likely become loyal customers and keep spreading good word of the hotel. In that manner, in the event that they are disappointed, they will probably switch off brands and talk bad of the brand to different customers about the hotel. The brand of the hotel is an essential factor that emphatically or contrarily influences advertising exercises and the image is the main thing that creates a good impression of the hotel (Pearce &amp; Robinson, 2011).

Nurminen (2007) discovered that cost is not the main reason that causes dissatisfaction of customers.  Basically, customer dissatisfaction is mostly caused by offering low quality products and services to customers. Customer satisfaction assumes an imperative part of your business. Not only is it the main pointer to quantify client unwaver-ingness, but also a key purpose of separation that helps you to draw in new clients in focused business situations (Nurminen, 2007).

Consumer loyalty is a good measure of the quality of services offered to customers. Ho-tels can create strategies to improve the quality of their services and products by measuring the level of their customers' loyalty. In most cases, customer satisfaction

lays out a blueprint that can be used to improve services. It gives the hotel management a reason to understand the needs of their customers and keep on offering quality services.

According to Mathews (2008), the main difficulty facing most industries is the ability to continue satisfying their customers while at the same time making huge profits. Competition puts pressure on many hotel services providers to provide quality services. Moreover, competition enhances many innovations that are focused on satisfying customers. Along these lines, it is important for hotels to come up with their own unique ways to meet the needs of their customers while at the same time making ample profits.

As indicated by Peters and Pikkemaat (2005), the employees play a major role in ensuring that customer needs are met. A successful employee evaluation project will ensure that the hotel management streamlines the conduct of employees while serving customers. Therefore, managers should use the feedback from customers to assess the competency of the employees. Moreover, such information could be used to define the elements of an ideal employee.

Morrison and O'Mahoney (2002) proposed another inspecting method that can enhance the quality of services offered by hotels. The evaluation technique is based on the responsiveness of employees when it comes to handling customer requests. They suggest that measuring the responsiveness of an employee is a good way to monitor the effectiveness of employees in terms of the speed service delivery. In this way, customers will feel that their needs are met in time. Responsiveness can also show the hotel's commitment to customer request and willingness to act on issues that may cause dissatisfaction.

It is worth noting that satisfaction is relative to different customers. As indicated by many researchers, some customers may not appreciate some services as much as others would. Subsequently, cultural differences may prompt the hotel to customize their services to fit the cultural practices of a specific customer. For example, a customer visiting Lake Kivu Serena Hotel from a foreign country may have different preferences as compared to customers from Rwanda. Therefore, the hotel should have adap-

tive employees who can learn the preferences of different customers and meet their needs accordingly. Thus, consumer loyalty is the aftereffect of learning the needs of a customer and offering services in a customized way (Tsiotsou &amp; Goldsmith, 2012).

## Significance of the study

## Personal interest

The purpose of the research was to compare impact of customer satisfaction in two different regions, namely Rwanda and Finland. The researcher had working experience in both conutries in the service sector

## Social interest

This study will facilitate service providers to know the importance of care to their customers in order to know customer satisfaction's role in an organization's growth.

## Academic interest

In academic or scientific issue, this research will help the other researchers in this field in doing the other research to the same field.

## Research problem

Customer satisfaction is an important aspect of every successful business including the hotel industry. In that regard every business should strive to have a good relationship with its customers to enhance loyalty and thus increase its profitability. However, many hotel managers face problems trying to satisfy their customers and end up experiencing high levels of customer dissatisfaction. The problem can be solved by learning customer needs and using the knowledge to increase satisfaction.  This thesis digs deeper into different ways of improving customer satisfaction.

## Problem statement in Rwanda

High profile hotels in Rwanda face the problem of retaining their customers due to the intense competition in the industry. Competition gives customers many options which makes it hard for a hotel like Lake Kivu Serena Hotel to hold on to their customers. As much as the hotel tries to meet the needs of its customers, their competitors offer many choices for the customers. Therefore, the hotel cannot be guaranteed to retain its cus-tomers since many customers need to explore other alternatives and experience the taste of different environments. This makes it hard for many hotels in Rwanda to re-tain their customers in the long run.

In 5 years, there was a gap in customer care, services providers couldn't care about their customers as well as their source of income. This pushed the government through the Rwandan Development Board (RDB) which is responsible of all the involvement of the country's development, RDB, to set up a customer care division to enable workers in public and private sectors improve the quality of service they were offering to their clients, RDB launched the customer care campaign 'Na Yombi' in march 2012 in order to sensitize service providers on the importance of delivering service with care (RDB, 2012).

Customer care in Rwanda still presents some challenges, but on the whole has greatly improved compared to 5 years ago. It is important to have a vibrant breed of service providers that respect the values of good customer service to keep pace with the growing folio of investments in the hospitality industry and the whole spectrum of services according to Mrs. Rica Rwigamba, (RDB, 2012).

Hospitality industry in Rwanda has been emerging in these two decades. On one hand, due to promotion effort through advertisement of RDB, for creativity of em-ployment which has given hotels in different areas particularly in northern province.

On the other hand, Rwandan hospitality industry failed to satisfy customers, and this has been shown by many complaints about how customer services are delivered

though needs to be based on professionalism where service providers have to develop their interpersonal skills, which needs to satisfy customer's needs, to provide quality service and this is what production is all about.

## 1.1 Research Questions

As much as Lake Kivu Serena Hotel prospers in Rwanda and the rest of the East Africa region, the management and stakeholders are aware of the threats of its competitors. In that case, the hotel has to keep improving its products and services to keep an edge above its competitors and ensure business continuity. Customer satisfaction is the main element that will enable the hotel to maintain its popular brand. It is through customer satisfaction that the hotel attracts new customers mostly through recommendations from loyal customers as well as through the popularity of the global Serena Group of Ho-tels Brand (Pearce &amp; Robinson, 2011). This paper explores different aspects of customer satisfaction while trying to answer the following research questions:

-  How can Lake Kivu Serena Hotel keep retaining their current customer satisfaction and loyalty and simultaneously gain new customers to further improve their profit margins?
-  How does Lake Kivu Serena Hotel determine the level of customer satisfaction and challenges faced by their customers in order to establish strategies to enhance customer satisfaction?
-  To what extent does customer satisfaction affect the profitability of Lake Kivu Serena Hotel?

## Research Objectives

-  To investigate how Serena Hotel could keep retaining their current customer satisfaction and loyalty and simultaneously gain new customers to further improve their profit margins.

-  To determine the level of customer satisfaction and challenges faced by their customers in order to establish strategies to enhance customer satisfaction
-  To deepen the understanding of CRM practices within the hotel industry and provide solutions on how to further help (the department) improve this important practice to sustain the current customers' loyalty and gain new customers. In this way, the organization's profits would be significantly improved.

## 1.2 Lake Kivu Serena Hotel

The Lake Kivu Serena Hotel's is a four-star hotel located at the shores of Lake Kivu, the sixth largest lake in Africa. The hotel is just outside Gisenyi, which is twenty minutes' flight from the capital of Rwanda, Kigali.

Figure 1 Lake Kivu Serena Hotel View

<!-- image -->

With business suites, family accommodation, and 66 hotel rooms, Lake Kivu stands out as one of the most luxurious hotels in Rwanda. The hotel is serenely sited in an extensive compound, that offers a holiday destination in Rwanda. The hotel offers different choices in terms of suites and rooms all with satellite TV, wireless Internet and voice-mail. The hotel has other facilities including a restaurant (Kiyaga Restaurant), café (Ziwani beach café and bar), bar (Lake View Bar and Terrace), health club (Mai-sha Health Club), conference rooms, swimming pool, business center, and a gift shop.

Figure 2 Lake Kivu Serena Hotel Meeting Room

<!-- image -->

## 2 Customer Satisfaction and CRM

## Introduction

The aim of this chapter is to review the available literature about the impact of customer's satisfaction Lake Kivu Serena Hotel. It attempts to define and explain the issues related to the topic of the study to arrive at the conceptual clarification. In other words, this chapter includes the literature and existing gaps on the research topic.

## Definitions of key concepts

This section involves definition of terms and theories necessary related to this research. In the world there are different senses, it is the reason why this research has given various definitions in which are taken as various key terms and concepts, so that the readers could have the best outline and well understanding.

## 2.1 Customer Satisfaction, service quality and customer expectations

According to Jana &amp; Chandra (2016), customer satisfaction has become an important aspect of the hotel industry. Unlike other industries, the hotel industry prospers due to customers' retention. It is only through customer satisfaction that a hotel can retain its customers. Basically, customers' loyalty is dependent on the quality of the services that they get in a hotel. Moreover, the hospitality industry has experienced the entrance of many investors who are willing to meet all the needs of their customers. Therefore, if customers are not satisfied by the services they receive in one hotel, they will look for better services elsewhere (Jana &amp; Chandra, 2016).

For a hotel to remain competitive in terms of customers' satisfaction, it must track the levels of customers' satisfaction. This is where technology comes in. Technology has been growing over the years and it has helped the management of the hotel industry to track statistics regarding customer satisfaction. For instance, online surveys are a popu-lar way of monitoring customers' satisfaction. Through these surveys, the man-

agement is able to implement a continuous improvement of their services and goods based on the needs of customers as expressed in their comments or other means of expression (Pearce, Robinson &amp; Mital, 2007).

One of the main strategies used by hotels to enhance customer satisfaction is benchmarking. Benchmarking enables hotels to learn from other players in the industry and learn what makes their competitors competitive. In some cases, some hotels may not reveal their secrets to their competitors. However, the hotel industry does not involve sensitive information. For this reason, most hotels are willing to share the secrets behind their success. Nonetheless, the only thing that makes some hotels prosper as com-pared to others is hotel innovativeness. Hotel innovation enables prosperous hotels to create new strategies that enhance a competitive advantage over their rivals.

Benchmarking is easier for chain hotels in that all hotels under the chain are able to borrow the traditions of the chain and offer similar services irrespective of their geographical locations. For example, Lake Kivu Serena Hotel inherits the strategies used by other hotels under the Serena chain and implements them such that a customer may feel the same environment, services, and goods as that of any other hotel operating under the Serena chain.

A few studies uncovered that customer loyalty is the main reason as to why some brands of hotels prosper while other lag behind. One key factor in customer retention is to guarantee quality services. In hotel industry customer loyalty is an element that shows the effectiveness of the management and all the stakeholders. A management approach focused on customer loyalty can improve the competitiveness of the hotel (Tsiotsou &amp; Goldsmith, 2012).

To achieve greater heights of customer satisfaction and loyalty, the management must show the willingness to adapt to the needs of customers. Hotels put a lot effort in understanding customer needs and fulfilling them end up learning many factors that contribute to customer satisfaction. Customer satisfaction should be given utmost consideration by the management, because it would be more expensive to draw in new customers that retaining the existing ones. In order to be fruitful, managers must focus on holding existing customers actualizing compelling arrangements of customer loyalty

and steadfastness. This is particularly valid in the hotel business (Tsiotsou &amp; Goldsmith, 2012).

In hotel industry, customer loyalty is mostly enhanced by combined efforts of all the stakeholders. Therefore, a hotel can only prosper in terms of customer satisfaction by involving all stakeholders in improving the quality of its services and products. Conse-quently, investigating the significance for customers of hotel traits in hotel choice is fundamental. In most cases, this is achieved by also involving customers in improving the quality of services by showing them that their suggestions are welcomed (Singh &amp; Dewan, 2009).

Keeping in mind the end goal to be fruitful in the business sector it is not adequate to draw in new customers. For this reason, managers must focus on holding existing customers executing successful arrangements of customer loyalty and loyalty. From eater-ies to hotels and everything in the middle of, your employment as a cordiality management supplier is to keep up customer bliss and satisfaction (Overby, 2007).

Consumer loyalty assumes a critical part inside of your business. Not just is it the main marker to quantify client dependability, distinguish despondent clients, lessen beat and build income; it is additionally a key purpose of separation that helps you to draw in new clients in aggressive business situations. Consumer loyalty is vital to any busi-ness. If your clients are satisfied they will probably buy more from you or from you all the more regularly (Morrison &amp; O'Mahoney, 2002).

Clients are the reason we are good to go and consumer loyalty is the thing that holds them returning. It requires a gigantic push to pick up another client and just seconds to lose one. Management must be model if the business needs to maintain and develop our client base and eventually our business.

The nature of management and customer loyalty are basic elements for accomplishment of any business. From being steady to ensuring they get the same wonderful management to doing what you say you will do, hotel management should not fail in regards to what they offer.  Customer loyalty has been a center of analysts and advertisers as an imperative forerunner of customer unwaveringness. Some late studies sug-

gest that customer charm conceivably creates more noteworthy customer steadfastness than satisfaction.

The motivation behind why faithful customers are so critical is on the grounds that it costs more than three times as much to draw in new customers than to hold existing ones. In addition, past customers unequivocally impact others by listening in on others' comments and suggestions. In this setting, managers ought to make it a point to be on the road to success for staying aware of patterns that their customers take after. This can be accomplished by building individual help management for travelling customers or making extraordinary concessions for ardent rehash shoppers (Porter, 1985).

Customers' experiences are seen all the more seriously and the desires tend to run somewhat higher than with different items and managements. Long haul and proportionally favorable connections between customers and the hotel are turning out to be logically essential as a result of the exceedingly positive relationship between customers' general satisfaction levels. Keeping in mind the end goal to be effective in providing quality services, a hotel should concentrate on the quality of services and products and customer satisfaction and loyalty will follow (Sim, Mak &amp; Jones, 2006).

Managers must make certain they have things close by so when their customer needs them and their items. That is to say that everything ought to be accessible. In this way, positive connections can make customer's higher duty and expansion their arrival rate.

Guest connections are a vital resource of the Lake Kivu Serena Hotel and consumer loyalty is the main strategy of creating a large network of customer connections. A customer who needs to constantly sit tight for you to do your part might become tired, regardless of how steadfast, and endeavor off to your opposition. Keep customers steadfast by concentrating on them at all times. These days, many hotel managers are challenged by customer satisfaction since some customers come but fail to return due to their preferences. Therefore, consistent advancement of hotel innovation and customer quality is the way to effective business technique, because of the requesting customers (Sim, Mak &amp; Jones, 2006).

There are yet new viewpoints and defects to be enhanced in customer satisfaction, notwithstanding the many researches about it. For this reason, innovativeness of hoteliers is the key factor that brings about success in the industry. In this view, the management has the major role to play in creating the unique techniques that can enhance customer satisfaction (Sim, Mak &amp; Jones, 2006).

The accommodation business must charge customers distinctive rates relying upon interest to stay profitable, in this way successful yield management is inside of the business critical. All things considered, giving astounding managements and enhancing consumer loyalty are generally perceived as basic variables boosting the exhibitions of organizations in the hotel and tourism industry (Nurminen, 2007).

Basically, high quality enables a principal part for hotels to make progress. It is vital for management of hotels to have a legitimate thought of what customers' necessities are. Charging customers more and giving less is not a triumphant blend from a guest satis-faction point of view, substantially less a triumphant business system (Peters &amp; Pik-kemaat, 2005).

Now and again, customers are once in a while unwittingly attempting to get however much information as could reasonably be expected through encounters of different customers to know everything about hotels. In this way, hoteliers ought to track the levels of consumer loyalty and make changes. Hoteliers must have the capacity to get large amounts of consumer loyalty by involving customers in developing a blueprint of what customers need (Peters &amp; Pikkemaat, 2005).

## Customer satisfaction and service quality

Service quality and customer satisfaction are inarguably the two core concepts that are at the crux of the marketing theory and practice (Mackoy, 1996). In today's world of intense competition, the key to a sustainable competitive advantage lies in delivering high quality service that results in satisfied customers (Shemwell et al., 1998).

The importance of these two concepts is further manifested by the cornucopia of theoretical and empirical studies on the topic that have emanated over the past few years. Therefore, there is not even an iota of doubt concerning the importance of service quality and customer satisfaction as the ultimate goals of service providers. (G.S. Sureshchandar, Chandrasekharan Rajendran R.N. Anantharaman, 2002).

A basic agreement emanating from the wide range of literature on service quality and customer satisfaction is that service quality and customer satisfaction are conceptually distinct but closely related constructs (Parasuraman et al., 1994; Dabholkar, 1995; Shemwell et al., 1998).

A range of authors have offered explanations to differences between service quality and customer satisfaction from the viewpoint of customers. The most notable work in that aspect belongs to Oliver (1997) as mentioned by Williams and Buswell (2003) and presented in the following table:

Table 1 Difference between service quality and customer satisfaction

| Service Quality                      | Customer Satisfaction    |
|--------------------------------------|--------------------------|
| Evaluated using specific clues       | Evaluation more holistic |
| Based on perceptions of 'excellence' | Based on needs           |
| Cognitive                            | Emotional                |

## Customer expectations

Excellent customer service and high customer satisfaction begins with understanding customer expectations. It has to be noted who your customers are and what they want. In companies 'customer satisfaction is generally measured by asking customers

whether their product or service has met or exceeded expectations. It is very important to ask this question because asking is a key factor that leads to customer satisfaction.

When customers have high expectations, and the reality fall short, they will be disappointed and will likely rate their experience as less than satisfying. For this reason, a luxury resort, for example, might receive a lower satisfaction rating than a budget motel even though its facilities and service would be deemed superior in 'absolute' terms.' - Marketing Metrics

Customer expectations set the bar for customer satisfaction, which also affects repurchase decisions and customer loyalty. If a customer feels like you did not deliver a service that was expected, they will not come back and buy from you again. On the flip-side, if you deliver a service that exceeds customer expectations, you can bet they will come back to buy again, and tell all their friends about the experience.

One of the author's favorite quotes about customer expectations is from Roy Hollister Wil-liams, a best-selling author and marketing consultant best known for his Wizard of Ads trilogy.

'The first step in exceeding your customer's expectations is to know those expectations.' - Roy Hollister Williams

## Benefits of understing customer expectations

Customer satisfaction is a result of the service level you deliver compared to what your customer expects to receive.

Here are the four benefits you can get from understanding customer expectations:

-  It lets you know what service levels are expected to keep customers happy and achieve high customer satisfaction
-  It enables employees to focus on fulfilling customers' expectations
-  It gives you the opportunity to exceed expectations and create raving advocates

-  It can help you resolve customer complaints. Since complaints are a result of failing to meeting expectations, you have the ability to quickly fix the problems and retain the business

## Customer satisfaction in Rwanda

Conditions of doing business are changing rapidly. In the last decade, the commodity market has witnessed a substantial growth and rapid change, globally as well as domestically. Customer satisfaction is a critical issue in the success of any business system, hence one of the key challenges on this market is how to satisfy and retain customers. The issue is strongly related to how service quality is managed, which holds a significant importance to customers' satisfaction and their perceived performance of companies. In order for companies to grow and survive, they must find new ways of thinking, which has led to various marketing researches, especially those related to customer satisfaction.

Rwanda is a very dynamic country, with a lot happening to achieve the country's Vision 2020. There are new opportunities, with many new businesses opening. Rwanda has just joined the East Africa Community and the Common Wealth, which will definitively create more competition in almost every sector of service. By the end of 2010, the services sector exhibited a growth of 9.6 percent benefiting from large public expenditures (Education, Health and Public Administration Services).

Customer service is the cornerstone of any solid and thriving business. Today we are in a service economy where it has been proven that it costs more than five times to get a new customer than to maintain the satisfaction and loyalty of an existing cus-tomer.

The research on Poor Customer Service and its Impact on the Rwandan Economy conducted by IPAR had the objective of evaluating customer satisfaction levels in Rwanda. It turned out that 25% of tourists experienced bad customer care during their stay in Rwanda.

Rwandan customer service is seen as the worst in the East African region, which comprises of Burundi, Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya. It also revealed that service quality varies across the sectors and is linked to skills, with white collar sectors generally performing better and blue collar sectors, notably transportation, remaining weak in service performance.

In addition, the biggest problem with poor customer care was the lack of consumer awareness of what to expect, and a cultural aversion to demanding better as one of the potential causes of poor service. Consumers who have lived outside Rwanda or visited elsewhere in the region are 50%

However, using the 'satisfaction profit chain' approach, reveals that if customer service were to improve significantly, it could increase the Rwandan Gross Domestic Profit (GDP),  as much as $40 million a year. ( I PAR-Rwanda.org)

## 2.2 Customer Relationship Management (CRM)

In this connection, it is worth noting that the concept of CRM can be defined in different ways. It also means different things to different people; depending on the working environment it has been used in (Baran et al., 2008; Dimitriadis and Steven, 2008; Piskar and Faganel, 2009). Therefore, there is no single correct definition of CRM (Abdullatif et al., 2010; Hamid, 2009; Nagi, 2005). However, to enrich the litera-ture about CRM, it will be defined as " a strategic approach that enables organiza-tions to use internal resources (i.e. Technology, people, and process) to manage the relationship with customers for the whole of their lives cycles, in order to create a competitive advantage and improve an organization's performance'.

Customer relationship management is the strategies used by businesses to manage their interaction with customers throughout the customers' lifecycle. The process involves creating a good relationship with customers to increase their satisfaction and develop a culture of mutual understanding. Lake Kivu Serena hotel uses different methods of enhnacing customer relations such as emails, social media, telephone and its website

## CRM and Hotel industry

Despite the fact that CRM brings lasting benefits to organizations, as a whole, some of them gain profits from implementing it more than others; CRM brings benefits to the organizations that generate a lot of information about customers (Bose, 2000; Kotler, 2002; Mguyen et al., 2007). In addition to this, Gronroos (2004) that service organizations for their intrinsic characteristics of the production and consumption are inseparable elements necessary to build relationships with customers. According-ly, CRM will be ideally suited to the hotel industry, especially when implementing it successfully and effectively, taking into our account that hotels receive a lot of data about customers. Such data can be transformed into useful knowledge about them (Kotler, 2002; Lin and Su, 2003; Mguyen et al., 2007; Nasution and Mavondo, 2008; Dev and Olsen, 2000). Suffice it to say that hotel industry, like any business sector has to be highly competitive to be able to do well in the business environment, therefore, it is of vital importance for it to encourage behavioral patterns of continuous re-purchase and to retain customers last longer.Thus , it is evident that such ambitious aims can only be achieved through implementing CRM , which will result in estab-lishing fruitful relationship between organizations and their customers (Papastatho-poulou et al., 2007; Verdugo et al., 2009). Moreover, it goes without saying that growing customeracquisition costs, rising customer expectations, price-sensitive travelers, more sophisticated clients, uncertain market and less brand loyalty are all key factors, which strongly urge hotels to focus on CRM as a useful strategy. Need-less to say, CRM is widely considered as one of the most effective ways to facilitate developing and expanding the customers' base that , in turn , will assist in enhancing profitability and guest loyalty (Mylonakis, 2009; Sigala, 2005; Sigala and Connolly, 2004; Wu and Li, 2011).

## Marketing

Marketing involves all the process used to reach out to customers local and globally.

Lake Kivu Serena hotel has the advantage of operating under the Serena Group of

Hotels that markets its brands globally. In that perspective, a customer who vistits Serena hotels will visit Lake Kivu Serena Hotel when in Rwanda. The hotel, also uses other ways to market its operations in Rwanda. For example, the hotel uses social media to reach out to its customers.

## 3 Research Design

This paper explores different aspects of cus-tomer satisfaction while trying to answer the following research questions:

-  How can Lake Kivu Serena Hotel keep retaining their current customer satisfaction and loyalty and simultaneously gain new customers to further improve their profit margins?
-  How does Lake Kivu Serena Hotel determine the level of customer satisfaction and challenges faced by their customers in order to establish strategies to enhance customer satisfaction?
-  To what extent does customer satisfaction affect the profitability of Lake Kivu Serena Hotel?

## Introduction

Information regarding hotels is based on both quantitative and qualitative data. For this reason, qualitative and quantitative research methods were used to collect and analyze data for this research. Interviews were used to gather qualitative data while questionnaires were used to gather quantitative data. To collect first-hand information, the stakeholders of the Lake Kivu Serena Hotel were interviewed (Creswell &amp; Clark, (2007).

Aggressiveness of the researcher enabled the Lake Kivu Serena Hotel management understand the essence of the research. This was possible by assuring the management of the hotel that the information would be used for academic purposes only. Essentially, questionnaires were issued to the hotel's major stakeholders. These stakeholders included the customers, the management, and the staff of the hotel.

## Research limitations

Getting all the information regarding a business' operations is not always possible. For this reason, the research on customer satisfaction at Lake Kivu Serena hotel cannot be trusted to be comprehensive. The information provided by management, staff,

and customers through interviews and questionnaires may not be accurate and thus compromise the accuracy of the research. On the other hand, information gathered through secondary research may not fully apply to the Lake Kivu Serena hotel since different hotels have different ways of conducting their operations.  In other words the management and staff might not provide all the information to the researcher inorder to protect the hotel.

## 3.1 Data Collection

The collection of first-hand information involved interviewing one person in the management, two staff members, and three customers. More first-hand information was collected by administering questionnaires to two people in the management position, 25 staff members, and 30 customers. The two people in the management position responded to the questionnaire while 22 staff members and 24 customers also responded to the questionnaires.

The research was based on a cross-sectional design where the management, staff, and customers influence and participates on customer satisfaction. The cross-sectional research design used questionnaires and interviews as primary sources of data. On the other hand, the secondary data was collected through printed books, newspapers, web publica-tions, experts, organizations, and magazines (Mugenda &amp; Mugenda, 2003).

Questionnaires were administered to customers in their hotel rooms so that they could fill them in when they were free and relaxing. The questions in the questionnaire had the impression that they are meant to improve the welfare of the customers so that they got excited to answer them. For the management and the staff of the hotel, the ques-tionnaires were administered when they were not very busy. They were allowed to take their time, at least a day or two so that they could fill in them when they were not busy. The questions for the management sought to answer the third research question (How much does customer satisfaction affect profitability of the hotel?) as well as how the management ensures high levels of customer satisfaction. Similarly, the questions for the staff of the hotel determined their input into customer satisfaction.

The Secondary sources of information including the internet, employees working there, printed books, newspapers, web publications, experts, organizations, and magazines specifically those published by the Serena Hotel Groups were used to complement the primary data collected through the interviews and questionnaires. The hotel's website (http://www.serenahotels.com/serenalakekivu/default-en.html) was a credible source of information that was used for the research. The website was useful in gathering data such as customers' reviews that are published in the guests' comments section of the website. Moreover, data was also collected by making online bookings to monitor the processes and procedures used by the hotel (Creswell &amp; Clark, (2007).

## Qualitative method

This is a method that is concerned with qualitative phenomena, meaning the phenomena that are related to quality of any kind. The aim of a qualitative method is discovering the underlying motives and desires by using in-depth interviews for the purpose.

According to Cohen and Aminion (1985), qualitative researchers stress to the socially constructed nature of reality, the intimate relationship between researchers and those researched, and the situational constraint that shapes the inquiry.

This method helped the researcher to obtain the types of information that is related to the feelings, perceptions, intentions and thoughts of the respondents.

## Quantitative method

This method is used in the measurement of the quantity or amount of variables. It is applicable to the phenomena that can be expressed in terms of quantity.

According to Denzin and Lincoln (2000), the quantitative method allows socioeconomic researchers to focus on variables of interests and the value of mathematical

symbols and permits economical summary information by using this method, through this method researcher was able to analyze impact of customer satisfaction on Lake Kivu Serena Hotel.

## 3.2 Data Analysis

The analysis of data was based on three hypotheses.

- 1. It was hypothesized that customer satisfaction enhances customer loyalty.
- 2. It was hypothesized that customer satisfaction influences attraction of new customers.
- 3. It was hypothesized that quality of products and services influences customer satisfaction.

First-hand data collected through questionnaires and interviews were analyzed through t-tests to compare customer loyalty, attraction of new customers and quality of products and services with customer satisfaction. Moreover, a collection coefficient of these values was used to find the relationship of the values with customer satisfaction. Secondary data obtained through literature review was analyzed using content analysis to capture the basic elements of customer satisfaction.

## 4 Research Results

A t-test is effective an effective way of comparing two variables by determining their correlation. A t-test based on the first hypothesis (customer satisfaction enhances customer loyalty) was done to compare customer satisfaction and customer loyalty. This t-test gave a t-Stat of 0.12231 and a t-Critical two-tail of 0.55689.  The outcomes of this t-test concur with our first hypothesis that customer satisfaction enhances customer loyalty since t-Critical (two-tail) has a larger value than its t-Stat (Mugenda &amp; Mugenda, 2003).

T-Test 1: Customer satisfaction and customer loyalty

|                     | Customer Satisfaction   | Customer Loyalty   |
|---------------------|-------------------------|--------------------|
| Mean                | 6.6754                  | 6.4954             |
| Variance            | 0.34                    | 0.38               |
| Observations        | 16                      | 16                 |
| Mean Difference     | 0                       |                    |
| d f                 | 24                      |                    |
| t Stat              | 0. 12231                |                    |
| P(T&lt;=t) one-tail    | 1                       |                    |
| t-Critical two-tail | 0. 55689                |                    |
| P(T&lt;=t) two-tail    | 0.5                     |                    |
| t-Critical two-tail | 0. 16234                |                    |

A second t- test based on the second hypothesis (customer satisfaction influences attraction of new customers) was conducted to compare customer satisfaction and attraction of new customers. The second t-test produced a t-Stat of 0.15431 and a tCritical two-tail of 0.64589.  Similarly, the outcomes of this t-test concurred with the second hypothesis that customer satisfaction influences attraction of new customers. This is supported by the fact that since t-Critical two-tail was greater than t-Stat (0.15431).

## T-Test 1: Customer satisfaction and attraction of new customers

|                     | Customer Satisfac- tion   | Attraction of New  Customers   |
|---------------------|---------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Mean                |                           |                                |
| Variance            | 0.28                      | 0.43                           |
| Observations        | 16                        | 16                             |
| Mean Difference     | 0                         |                                |
| d f                 | 23                        |                                |
| t Stat              | 0. 15431                  |                                |
| P(T&lt;=t) one-tail    | 1                         |                                |
| t-Critical two-tail | 0. 64589                  |                                |
| P(T&lt;=t) two-tail    | 0.5                       |                                |
| t-Critical one-tail | 0. 53944                  |                                |

In terms of correlation, the results show a correlation co-efficient of 0.9452 between the quality of services and products with customer satisfaction. The value ranges between positive and negative 1. When the value is closer to positive 1, there is a close relationship between the quality of services and products and customer satisfaction. Therefore, the correlation supports our third hypothesis that quality of products and services influences customer satisfaction.

Figure 3 Satisfaction Vs Retention Graph

<!-- image -->

## 5 Conclusion

## Reflections on the research

The discoveries of this study affirm the verging on clear articulation that the nature of management is absolutely related with customer satisfaction, the better the relationship between costs of management the higher the consumer loyalty which eventually prompts better execution. The image of a hotel also plays a role in customer loyalty. It implies that the image of a hotel has a more noteworthy impact on consumer loyalty (Tsiotsou &amp; Goldsmith, 2012).

This study highlights the significance of brand and consumer loyalty to enhancing customer loyalty. Additionally, in a hotel network, this might introduce challenges for services since the performance of one hotel might impact customers' impression of different hotels in the same chain. It is, accordingly, essential to keep up consistency in service norms of all hotels having a place with the chain (Pearce &amp; Robinson, 2011).

It is likewise clear that all the indicator variables are emphatically connected with consumer loyalty. The findings of this study uncover that the nature of management is decidedly identified with consumer loyalty. Consequently, it is inferred that the higher the level of management the higher the resulting consumer loyalty. Thus, it is essential to note that the nature of management keeps on affecting consumer loyalty (Pearce, Robinson &amp; Mital, 2007).

The study was conducted to explore the correlation between consumer loyalty and customer devotion and satisfaction. All the speculations were acknowledged, which was demonstrated from the examination. The quality of services and consumer loyalty are specifically related since high quality improves the satisfaction. The development in the administration quality or by enhancing the nature of services the hotels turned out to be more ready to fulfill the needs of customers. For this reason, the satisfaction of cus-tomers leads toward loyalty as illustrated by many studies. When a customer is satis-fied, they stay loyal to the hotel and subsequently, it influences the chances of

referring to other customers and creating a good reputation of the hotel (Peters &amp; Pikkemaat, 2005).

Hoteliers must abstain from being self-satisfied following held customers who may not generally be the satisfied ones and also not every single satisfied customer might de-pendably be held. Research has called attention to the apparent quality services that positively affects customer loyalty. There is every reason to believe that the main factor influencing satisfaction is the quality of the services offered by a hotel. It is also worth keeping in mind that customer loyalty is due to satisfaction (Porter, 1998).

Lake Kivu Hotel must have the capacity to create loyalty amongst their customers since building customer commitment is the main way of building a reasonable competitive edge in the industry. However, not every reliable customer is essentially a satisfied  customer. Therefore, the level of service quality plays a major role in customer satisfaction. Essentially, customers' needs are said to be fulfilled in the light of the fact that they have positive sentiments due to the value of what they get versus the amount of money they spend to acquire services from a hotel (Pearce, Robinson &amp; Mital, 2007).

## Recommendation

The results of this research suggest that the management of Lake Kivu Serena Hotel should be more proactive as opposed to receptive in their reaction techniques. This implies that the administration ought to be extremely ready for adjustments in the business environment and they ought to be quick to react in a short time so as to outmaneuver competition. Lake Kivu Serena Hotel needs to do all it takes to stay on top and in this way stay competitive. Lake Kivu Serena Hotel ought to likewise forcefully advertise their products and services to promote mindfulness in the business sector and it should be dynamic and innovative to draw in more clients and hold the existing ones.

The complaints of the customers ought to be well respected. The hotel will then be more open to outside thoughts on the off chance that they handle the thoughts. The

hotel should mastermind and present streamlined hotel guides who are more proficient in the hotel industry.

## 6 Discussion

## 5.1 SWOT analysis on Serena Hotel

## Strengths:

-  Excellent compound with a good view of Lake Kivu
-  Most noteworthy number of rooms accessible
-  Present day Health Club Facilities
-  Wellbeing and Security
-  Global Service Standard
-  Novel Architecture and Décor
-  Focal Air-molding and Heating
-  Digital TV Network
-  Presidential Suites, Executive Suites, Executive Club, and Non-Smoking Floor
-  In-house Laundry
-  24 hours Room Service
-  24 hours Business Center
-  24 hours Doctor on Call
-  Out entryway Swimming Pool
-  Assortment of Restaurant
-  Online Internet Services

## Weakness

-  Business reliant on arriving flights
-  Non-Availability of prepared and qualified staff
-  Checking-in time is constrained because of non entry of night flights.
-  Low pay of individuals of the district
-  Resistance among the staff and distinctive offices
-  Constrained amusement and Tourist attractions
-  Absence of hoteling mindfulness in neighborhood individuals which at last influences its business

-  Nearby market Sensitive to cost
-  Low motivation among the staff because of low pay
-  Employees' anxiety because of long working hours

## Opportunities

-  Restoration of government ventures
-  Developing Chain
-  Government Stability
-  Peace and soundness in Rwanda
-  Flood of non-governmental organizations
-  Administration Standards
-  Estimation of cash

## Threats

-  Opening up of Guesthouses
-  Increased competition
-  Increment in low value eateries
-  Decline Law and request circumstance in the locale
-  Market impression of cost
-  Destabilized financial strategies
-  Set number of Hotel going Guests

## 6.1 Organizational chart of Serena Hotel

Figure 4  Chart of Serena Hotel

<!-- image -->

## 6.2 Analysis of the Results

Consumer loyalty has always been considered to be the ultimate fruits of customer satisfaction. Regardless of the different ways to measure customer satisfaction levels, there is no a standard method of measuring customer satisfaction. Consumer satisfaction is commonly characterized by what a customer needs compared to what they get from a hotel. Therefore, different hotels should have a customized way of meeting their customers' needs. For example, providing many options is an effective way of meeting the needs of customers. However, the quality of goods and services plays the main part when it comes to customer satisfaction (Peters &amp; Pikkemaat, 2005).

As illustrated in the graph below, customer loyalty is closely related to customer satisfaction.

Figure 5 Customer Loyalty Vs Customer Satisfaction

<!-- image -->

Satisfaction occurs when a service or product is superior or equal to the expectations of a customer.  By meeting the hotel's services about the outcomes, it shows that they didn't have the impression of the flaws found in the hotel industry. In spite of the fact that the last administration intensely relies on  the nature of the hotel's structure, a specific level of change perhaps gets through a solid exertion towards their customization (Mathews, 2008).

Quality services and products are the most basic to the customers concerning their satisfaction. Normally, customer satisfaction in the hotel industry is exceptionally helpful and it can open the bearings for further research by making a remittance for a wide range of variables. If the proprietors of the hotels genuinely need to increase

their competitive edge today, then they should attempt to focus on important aspects of customer satisfaction. The Quality of services is a major element that makes customers satisfied and which, accordingly, will bring customer retention and devotion for the proprietors. For all intents and purposes, talking about the investigation of consumer loyalty is both urgent and basic (Peters &amp; Pikkemaat, 2005).

Expanding rivalry is driving hoteliers to give careful consideration to satisfying their customers, including by giving solid customer services. Prospect endeavors ought to drag out to press forward the better comprehension of the idea, the holes deserted and the way to gage and liven up the consumer loyalty approaches. Keeping in perspective the discoveries of the study, the management of the hotel industry might especially concentrate on the business elements other than all aspects of the industry. Hotels ought to comprehend the requirements of the customer and give polite services productively in providing their services (Sim, Mak &amp; Jones, 2006).

Workers at front work area are the key faculty who frame the impression of the hotel. In this manner, their appearance should be flawless. They ought to endeavor to give every customer a customized touch. This way, their responsibility for all customers should be enduring. Customers typically incline toward lodgings which have wide product offerings, quality offerings at sensible costs and helpful area. Consequently, directors ought to focus on these components. Customer needs are influenced by the cultural background of the customer, natural needs such as those of vegetari-ans, as well as the quality of the services. Moreover, the conduct of those providing the services is a major factor when it comes to satisfaction.

It is clear that the needs of a customer are based on tangible and non-tangible aspects of service provision. The tangible aspects of the needs include the quality of food, beverages, rooms, beds, beddings, and other minor elements of a hotel. On the other hand, the non-tangible aspects are influenced by the hospitality of those servicing the customers (Singh &amp; Dewan, 2009).

Consumer satisfaction is a term that portrays a customer's perception of the value of the services they have received compared to the amount they have spent on the products and services. The needs of customers let us know their perception of the value of

the services they want. As it is proposed in different pieces of literature, customers have differ-ent needs while framing sentiments around the provision of the services. Therefore, consumer satisfaction information is a main indicator of how different customers per-ceive the quality of services offered by a hotel (Singh &amp; Dewan, 2009).

Hoteliers have concentrated a great deal more on the significance of consumer loyalty that is dependent on customer satisfaction. From the business point of view, where the basic items have gotten to be product like, the nature of benefits intensely rely on upon the nature of its work force. The customer satisfaction works in business sectors whose tastes change as times change. The hotel industry is enormously influenced by these progressions, which implies the customer care needs to change in that manner.

Customer's discernment about products and services depends on nature of  the services or products. A loyal customer is a customer who keeps consuming the services of a hotel and keeps recommending the services of the hotel to other people. Commitment to customer satisfaction increases the chances of winning their loyalty. Normally, it is more productive clutching existing customers than winning new customers. Hotels ought to attempt to accomplish the satisfaction of their current customers giving them rewards such as loyalty cards.

Previously, hotels were considered  places of getting meals and accommodation when one was not in a position to access such services at home. In this view, they were considered services for those whom hotel services were inevitable. Gu ̈ ngo ̈ r (2007) states that hotel management did not have to worry about customer satisfaction as compared to the profitability of the hotel in the past. However, when people started traveling a lot for business and pleasure reasons, the hotel industry required customer loyalty which is only gained through satisfaction.

Giving top notch services and improving satisfaction are generally perceived as essential components boosting the exhibitions of hotels. Only the hotels with the best in terms of quality are assured of customer satisfaction hence loyalty. In an aggressive hospitality industry, only those who offer quality services and enhance customer satisfaction experience business continuity and profitability (Peters &amp; Pikkemaat, 2005).

To get dependability and to exceed different contenders, Lake Kivu Serena Hotel must ensure that it is an edge above its competitors. To do so, quality of their services and products must get the main focus. The hotel has been success in ensuring customer satisfaction through provision of quality services. However, the dynamic nature of the hospitality industry needs continuous improvement of products and services (Peters &amp; Pikkemaat, 2005).

It could be contended that workers are relied upon to be caring, obliging, and chipper while serving the client. These characteristics of quality customer service might likewise be unmistakably characterized in the customer service. Rather than doing it since it's the best thing to do, great customer service is currently a condition that is required for every organization. As a rule, the primary element which restrains the Lake Kivu Serena Hotel's capacity to accomplish higher customer satisfaction levels is the institu-tionalization of administrations that lessens the likelihood to modify the offer for par-ticular visitor needs (Szwarc, 2005).

Considering the case of the fast food industry, the management can offer drive through quality services. The desire is that we will get what we requested and get the right change when we pay. The management of the hotel ensures that customer satisfaction needs are rendered and desires have been met.

The best way to learn what customers need is by asking them. As indicated by Tsiotsou &amp; Goldsmith, (2012), visitor remarks should be used to figure out the needs of various customers. For instance, the comments of customers in the hotel's website should be used to improve the quality of products and services. Therefore, every comment should be treated with a lot of solemnity (Tsiotsou &amp; Goldsmith, 2012).

A customer's loyalty is shaped by numerous natural elements including their encounters with low quality services in the past. Additionally, cultural practices may influence the needs of a customer. Normally, satisfaction is relative to different customers. Some customers might be pleased with some services while others may not appreciate the same services. Besides, the perception of a customer on the reputation of the hotel may influence their attitude towards the quality of the services offered by certain hotels. In some cases, some customers may not avoid some hotels due to some reasons

such as conferences and meetings. In that case, they might have negative attitude towards the hotel's staff and create a negative image of the hotel.

The differing levels of customer satisfaction can be neutralized by enormous customer loyalty. While consumer loyalty is a generally acknowledged and demonstrated essential to increase client unwaveringness, there have been moderately few studies on brand as the essential for client dependability. For instance, some customers may like the services offered by a hotel because others like them. As illustrated by the findings of this research, there is need to expand consumer loyalty as far as service deliverance, and the capacity to build up an ideal image of the hotel (Peters &amp; Pikkemaat, 2005).

Different parts of the hotel operation might have direct impact on the image of the hotel. Therefore, it is significant that marketing is done with the intent of creating a prosperous brand like the Serena Group of hotels. For instance, lowering the cost might pull in a specific class of customer base. To a client, the hotel's customer base is a component that altogether and by implication mirrors the hotel's image. Consequently, drawing in clients who do not talk good of the brand of the client base might contrarily influence the reliability of existing clients (Tsiotsou &amp; Goldsmith, 2012).

To be sure, from the unstructured meetings to the hotel's administration it got to be clear that the hotel receives a push to enhance a marketing approach. The offer of tour-istic services is chosen by the service and not in coordinated effort neither with cus-tomers nor considering their particular needs. Additionally, consumer loyalty is not used to separate the services supplied.

Due to the expanding worldwide business sector rivalry, numerous hotels are confront-ing challenges in holding clients. By raising fulfillment or quality gauges, organizations step by step raise visitors' desire level, which then makes it more troublesome and all the more unreasonable to satisfy them. Clutching a returning visitor is critical to a hotel in light of the fact that after some time they lessen the expense of administration (Por-ter, 2005).

Lake Kivu Serena Hotel has what it takes to be the best hotel in the region, but that must be accomplished through persistent re-training of the work force and inspiration of employees to offer satisfactory services. This is achieved through motivations, which will give them the resolve to endeavor towards giving quality and solid services. East Africa nations have acknowledged it is just through quality services that customer satisfaction can be achieved. As more hotels open around the region, there is a need to be the best service provider so that the hotel can remain competitive and an edge above the rest of the players in the industry (Pearce &amp; Robinson, 2011).

The ultimate goal of quality services is to develop a brand that attracts new customers and encourages past customers to visit the hotel again and again. This is achieved through collective responsibility by all the stakeholders of a hotel while at the same time involving customers. Customer's reliability can along these lines be accomplished by offering services that will attract them as well as appreciating their presence in  a hotel. Loyal customers are people who are inclined to come again and will always rec-ommend the hotel to other people (Tsiotsou &amp; Goldsmith, 2012).

Lake Kivu Serena Hotel has always given quality services to its customer base. The hotel has a customer care administration strategy which makes it easier for customer satisfaction. These strategies incorporate selective settlement, productive and opportune conveyance of services, hotel guides, security, customer care, parking spot, fulltime front office services, and reckoning of customer services.

Customers who have been guaranteed quality services expect nothing but the best. For example, a customer visiting a hotel with a good reputation such as Serena Group of hotels expect quality services as compared to a customer visiting a relatively unknown hotel. Therefore, guaranteeing quality services comes with the pressure of delivering such services. This might pressure the management of the staff but it has the benefits of high profitability. In that case, the management and the staff ought to adapt to the pressure of carrying the demanding Serena brand and illustrate the quality of the brand to its customers (Peters &amp; Pikkemaat, 2005).

Consumer satisfaction can be considered to be imperative since it depends on the numerous needs of customers. Consumer loyalty can develop after some time as clients

over and again utilize an item or connect with an administration. The fulfillment experienced with every cooperation can impact the generally, combined fulfillment. Researchers demonstrated that it is general consumer loyalty, as well as client dependability that advances after some time (Tsiotsou &amp; Goldsmith, 2012).

Of the considerable number of approaches to expand consumer loyalty and augment customer maintenance, personalization is a standout amongst the most capable systems. customers will probably be alright with organizations who know them and location their necessities. Given the way that it's less demanding than at any other time to oversee and utilize customer data, Lake Kivu Serena Hotel searches for better approaches to make each customer feel essential, and that what you're putting forth is particularly customized to them (Pearce &amp; Robinson, 2011).

The Lake Kivu Serena Hotel or the entire Serena Group image and client satisfaction are close associated with each other. Satisfaction strengthens uplifting dispositions toward the brand, prompting a more prominent probability that the same brand will be acquired once more. On the other hand, disappointment prompts negative brand states of mind and decreases the probability of purchasing the same brand once more (Pearce &amp; Robinson, 2011).

Developing a prosperous brand such as the Serena Group of hotels takes a lot of effort and dedication towards customer satisfaction. Such solid brands are also challenging in terms of maintaining their competitiveness. Accordingly, the expressed objective of vital brand administration is to manufacture marks that keep going for a considerable length of time and can be utilized in various item classifications.

## References

(G.S. Sureshchandar, Chandrasekharan Rajendran R.N. Anantharaman, 2002).

Cohen and Aminion (1985), Research methods in education

Gu ̈ ngo ̈ r, H. (2007). Observing and registering emotional satisfaction of customer contacts. [Amsterdam]: Amsterdam Univ. Press.

http://blog.clientheartbeat.com/customer-expectations

Jana, A., &amp; Chandra, B. (2016). Mediating Role of Customer Satisfaction in the MidMarket Hotels: An Empirical Analysis. Indian Journal Of Science And Technolo-gy, 9(1). http://dx.doi.org/10.17485/ijst/2016/v9i1/81973

Mathews, J. (2008). Hotel management. Jaipur, Raj., India: Pointer Publishers.

Morrison, A. &amp;O'Mahoney, G. B. (2002). Hospitality: A Liberal introduction. Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Management, Vol. 9 No. 2, pp 189-197

Mugenda, O. M. and Mugenda A. G. (2003).Research Methods, Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches. Acts Press, Nairobi

Narain, S. (2008). Inside hotels. Singapore: Page One.

Nurminen, M. (2007). Guest experience design in hotel industry. Burnaby, B.C.: Simon Fraser University.

O'Brien, J. A. (2002). Management Information System: Managing Information Tech-nology in the E-Business Enterprise. Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Lim-ited, New Delhi

Overby, S. (2007).The ABCs of Outsourcing: A Need to Know Guide on Outsourcing, CIO Magazine, Online: www.ne-inc.com/docs/ABCs\_of\_Outsourcing.pdf Pearce, J. A., and Robinson, R. B. (2007).Strategy Issues Management: Formulation, Implementation and Control. (7th Ed.). Boston Burr Ridge: McGrawHill/Irwin

Pearce, J. A. and Robinson, R. B. (2011).Strategic Management: Formulation, Implementation, and Control.(12th Ed.).Boston Burr Ridge: McGrawHill/Irwin

Pearce, J. A., Robinson, R. B. and Mital, A. (2007).Strategy Issues Management: Formulation, Implementation and Control New Delhi: Tata McGraw-Hill

Peters, M., &amp; Pikkemaat, B. (2005). Innovation in hospitality and tourism. New York: Haworth Hospitality Press.

Porter, M. E. (1985). Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance. New York: Free Press

Porter, M. E. (1998). Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors. New York: Free Press

Porter, M. E. (2005). Competitive Advantage.The Free Press: New York

Sim, J., Mak, B., &amp; Jones, D. (2006). A Model of Customer Satisfaction and Retention for Hotels.Journal Of Quality Assurance In Hospitality &amp; Tourism, 7(3), 1-23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/j162v07n03\_01

Singh, U., &amp; Dewan, J. (2009). Hotel management. New Delhi: APH Pub. Corp., in association with Indian Institute of Management.

Szwarc, P. (2005). Researching customer satisfaction &amp; loyalty. London: Kogan Page.

Tsiotsou, R., &amp; Goldsmith, R. (2012). Strategic marketing in tourism services. Bingley: Emerald.

## Appendices

## Appendice 1. Consent Email

Dear Sir,

My name is Joleen. I am currently final year student at Jamk University of applied sciences majoring in Facility and Management in Finland. I had a chance to do my internship in Lake Kivu Serena Hotel few moths ago.

I am undertaking a research on 'Customer satisfaction in hotel services'. I would like to seek your consent since my research will involve collecting information from the customers as well as your staff through interviews and questionnaires.

I promise to use the information regarding your hotel for only academic purposes. Most importantly, the information and responses gathered from the hotel will not be published or shared with other people, they will be treated with utmost confidentiality.

I will highly appreciate your consideration.

Thank you in advance

Sincerely,

Joleen

## Appendice 2. Interview Questions

- 1. What is your key customer relationship management strategy?
- 2. How do you measure customer satisfaction in your hotel?
- 3. What comes first: Customer satisfaction or Profit?
- 4. How do you train your employees to ensure customer satisfaction?
- 5. What is the main challenge you face in terms of enhancing customer satisfaction?

## Appendice 3. Questionnaires

## The following questionnaire was administered to customers of Lake Kivu Serena Hotel

- 1. What is your gender?
-  Female
-  Male
- 2. Please select your age from the following age brackets
-  18 years -35 years
-  36 years -55 years
-  56 years -75 years
-  Above 75 years

## Do you reside in this town?

-  Yes
-  No
- 3. What is the specific reason that brought you to Lake Kivu Serena Hotel?
-  Pleasure
-  Work
-  Adventure
-  Business
-  Holiday
-  Visiting People
-  Other

Specify

- 4. How will you rate the quality of the services offered by this hotel in a rating scale of 1 to 10?
-  1
-  2
-  3
-  4
-  5
-  6
-  7
-  8
-  9
-  10
- 5. Do you get all your preferred kinds and foods and drinks in this hotel? If No, please give a brief description of your preferences.
-  Yes
-  No

```
Description
```

- 6. Have you ever raised suggestions, complains or complements to the management of this hotel regarding the quality of their services?
-  Yes
-  No
- 7. Did the management take any action on  your suggestions, complains or complements (Raised in 6 above)
-  Yes
-  No
- 8. What is the approximate number of times you have visited this hotel?
-  This is my first visit
-  This is my second visit
-  This is my third visit
-  5-10 visits
-  10-15 visits
-  I visit this hotel daily
-  I visit this hotel weekly
-  I visit this hotel once in a month
-  I visit this hotel every time I have toured this country or region
- 9. What is the average number of days you spend in this hotel?
-  Less than 3 days
-  3 days to 5 days
-  1 week
-  1 to 2 weeks
-  1 month
-  Over 1 month
- 10. Which services do you value other than meals and accommodation?
-  Transport
-  Gambling
-  Telecommuting
-  Conference
-  Swimming Pools
-  Pub
-  Other

Specify

The following questionnaire was administered to the staff of Lake Kivu Serena Hotel

- 1. Have you ever received suggestions, complains or complements from customers regarding the quality of the services offered by this hotel?
-  Yes
-  No
- 2. Did the customer require you to act immediately?
-  Yes
-  No
- 3. If yes in (2 above), what was your first reaction to this complain regarding the quality of the services?
-  Solved the issue and the customer was satisfied
-  Informed my immediate boss who acted on the issue
-  Ignored the complain since it was not genuine
-  Explained to the customer that the issue would be solved later
-  Other
- 4. Do you make a follow-up of the issues raised by customers?
-  Yes
-  No
- 5. Which  category  of  your  services  raises  many  issues  from  customers  regarding the quality of your services?
-  Meals
-  Accommodation
-  Transport
-  Telecommuting
-  Conference
-  Swimming Pools
-  Pub
-  Competency of the staff
-  Other
- 6. Would you make changes to the quality of the services offered by this hotel if you in the management position?
-  Yes, I would make little changes
-  Yes, I would make overhaul changes
-  No, the system is optimal

Specify

Specify

The following questionnaire was administered to the management of the Lake Kivu Serena Hotel.

- 1. Do you evaluate the levels of customer satisfaction?
-  Yes
-  No
- 1. What method do you use to measure the level of customer satisfaction?
-  Surveys
-  Net Promoter Score (NPS)
-  Objective Measurement
-  Measuring Exit and Abandon Rates
-  Other
- 2. Have you ever experienced negative feedback from many customers? 
- Yes
-  No
- 3. If yes, what action did you take to ensure higher levels of customer satisfaction and avoid such negative feedback?
-  Summoned the stakeholders for a crisis meeting
-  Directly implemented new changes based on the feedback
-  Commission a research to determine the root cause
-  Consulted external experts
-  Firing incompetent staff and hiring new ones
-  Did nothing
-  Other
- 4. What is the approximate abandonment and exit rate of your customers in the last one year?
-  0%-10%
-  11%- 20%
-  21%-30%
-  31%-40%
-  41%-50%
-  51%-60%
-  61%-70%
-  71%-80%
-  81%-90%
-  91%-100%
- 5. How do you train your staff to enhance high levels of customer satisfaction?

Specify

Specify

-  Through external training courses
-  Through internal workshops
-  Through mentorship and guidance
-  All of the above
-  Other

Specify